Statement of Purpose

Passionate about creating a socially-aware dialogue agent that mirrors human communication, I find myself at the confluence of Natural Language Processing (NLP), Machine Learning (ML), and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). The alluring image of David, the robot boy from Steven Spielberg’s Artificial Intelligence, yearning for humanity and love, has been my guiding beacon towards a career in Computer Science. A model dialogue agent should not only exhibit creativity for engaging long-form conversations but also display reciprocity in a socially-appropriate manner while navigating real-life uncertainties gracefully—traits that current virtual assistants often fall short of achieving.

Over the past three years, I have made significant contributions to NLP through eight publications with over 40 citations at leading NLP conferences. My undergraduate research in automated narrative generation at Georgia Institute of Technology has been instrumental in enhancing agents' creative abilities in long-form dialogues. These dialogues are complex because they require the ability to understand and remember current dialogue states to avoid contradictory responses—a capability that most agents currently lack. During my 1.5 years at Georgia Tech, my research resulted in publications on reducing non-normative content in generations (INLG 2020 [1]), surveying narrative generations (NAACL 2021 [2]), and improving narrative logical coherence through COMET-based filtering (EMNLP 2022 [3]).

Through conducting Mechanical Turk studies for these projects, I discovered the challenges in evaluating natural language generations. Lower perplexity does not always equate to better creativity, indicating that human evaluations should play a more prominent role in the research pipeline, particularly for user-facing systems I will develop throughout my Ph.D. My recent first-author EMNLP 2022 [4] work with Prof. Christopher Potts further demonstrated limitations in language model generations by demonstrating a lack of evidence for GPT-3’s structural knowledge of noun compounds. This research at Georgia Tech and Stanford University has shed light on the challenges in narrative generation, inspiring me to delve deeper into these issues.

To create more human-like speech behaviors, I focused on this aspect during my Master's at Stanford University. Humans often find communication more comfortable with agents that mimic their behaviors; for instance, Siri does not respond when a user interjects, which is unnatural in human conversation. To improve the user experience and unlock the full potential of dialogue agents, it is essential to make them exhibit such natural speech behaviors. In the fall of 2021, I began collaborating with Prof. Christopher Manning and Dr. Ashwin Paranjape to provide spoken dialogue agents with better turn-taking capabilities. Current voice agents wait for a silence before responding, resulting in awkward conversational flows and an inferior user experience. To address this issue, we trained a model to continuously predict the answer to "how long until my next utterance?". My research, analysis of prior literature, code base development, and proposed research directions led to a first-author paper at SIGDIAL 2022 [5] and an article by Stanford HAI. Building a quick Flask demo for the system was a cherished moment, confirming that my true satisfaction lies in implementing user-facing AI systems capable of handling real-world stochasticity with finesse.

Moving forward, I aim to integrate socially-appropriate conversational behaviors into spoken dialogue agents. Inspired by Meta’s work on modeling speech through acoustic "units", Prof. Manning and I plan to transform dialogue agent generations into natural response audios. This project will build upon the unit-to-speech pipeline by Meta, reframing text-to-speech as text-to-unit-to-speech to generate naturalistic artifacts (e.g., hesitations and laughter) commonly captured by unit-based approaches. In the next quarter, I will mentor an undergraduate to train a model that translates generated dialogue utterances into more disfluent and natural utterances (e.g., "I just had dinner" → "I, uh, I just had dinner"). Meanwhile, I joined the Amazon Alexa Prize Team this year, providing me access to real, live users not typically available in academia. This opportunity will inform my future dialogue research on better conversational behaviors and more realistic modeling of speaker dynamics.

During the summer of 2022, I collaborated with Prof. Jonathan Gratch to study face-to-face negotiation data. We explored associating backchannels (short utterances like "yeah", “uh-huh”, head nods, and shakes) with negotiation outcomes. Existing tools were less than perfect: the facial action unit analyzer struggled when humans moved beyond certain positions or wore glasses, while our speech recognizer missed and mistook words. To address these limitations, I supplied our model with more reliable features, including head positions and audio. Despite numerous challenges, I trained a model to predict frame-by-frame backchannel opportunities, which served as a diagnostic tool for negotiation conversations. Preliminary results showed positive, statistically significant correlations between the model's F1 score and the rapport felt by partners. We are still developing this work and plan to submit a publication to the journal Computers in Human Behavior in the coming months. This project prepared me for a human-centric research career by exposing me to diverse human behaviors and their stochasticity, requiring extensive statistical analyses.

My future research will likely continue along these lines, focusing on enhancing agent capabilities for coherent long-form conversations and the naturalness of agent utterances. I am keen on collaborating with Prof. Zhou Yu due to her work on dialogue generation and real-time interactive systems, and with Prof. Julia Hirschberg for her research on spoken dialogue systems. I am confident that a Ph.D. at Columbia will enable me to contribute significantly to my research directions in the pursuit of bringing a dialogue agent like David to life.