Tab 1
The “My Pillows & Me” Example College Essay
“I can’t sleep without them!” my face scrunched up, clutching piles of cushions in an uncharacteristic moment of seven-year-old stubbornness. An overnight trip without my Stitch face pillow? My dolphin pillow pets?  This was absolutely unacceptable, robbing me of the comfort and structure that was my nightly routine. Today, ten-years later, I still relish flopping backwards onto my bed, cushioned by my carefully curated collection of pillows, each encasing a different side of myself:
Smiling beside me is my chibi avocado pillow, a celebratory gift from my parents for finally trying guacamole. Green, mushy, yucky! I once wrinkled my nose in disgust at the outward appearance of this vegetable (fruit?): before tasting the tableside guac at our favorite Mexican joint. Today, I laugh at the “avocado anecdote” looking at this pillow, but simultaneously remember the message my parents sent me; a reminder to never dismiss new opportunities at first glance. 
Near the avocado, a ruffled teal pillow from Target sits atop its matching ruffled duvet. Struck with inspiration to redesign my room, I bought this pillow in middle school, after viewing an artsy article in American Girl Magazine’s spring spread. Design continues to fuel my burning creative spark, whether through computing or character art. From the “Coding Projects in Scratch” book, I took inspiration to tinker with block-based programming, designing my own graphics-based puzzles & platformers that provided me the fundamentals to pursue higher-level CS in Python & Java. In the pages of Christopher Hart’s “Master Guide to Drawing Anime”, I study dynamic character composition and the intricacies of cell shading, applying these illustrative techniques to my own digital art.
Propped against the headboard, a My Melody pillow cushions my head, a nod to my former aversion to all things “cute.” At age thirteen, the mere thought of being seen sleeping with a pink, fluffy, bunny pillow (Hello Kitty-branded, no less!) horrified me. Now, through My Melody, I embrace my whimsical side, unapologetically jamming out to bubbly idol music or squealing over the turquoise, twin-tailed virtual popstar Hatsune Miku. While tuning synthesized singing vocals for my VOCALOID cover channel on YouTube, my inner geek shines through my usually studious and composed exterior.
Lounging lazily beside my bed sits the master pillow, Slothogus, the 3 foot tall, jumbo stuffed sloth, doubling as my go-to living room throw pillow. As my brain rapidly flips between subjects, whether cramming fundamental forces in AP Physics 1, rapidly typing an 11-page research report for AP Seminar, or frantically debugging Java assignments for my Columbia U class, I often find myself overwhelmed by my academic “overachiever” habits. To quiet this mental clamor, I spare a moment of rest on Slothogus’ plush shoulder. From his stitched smile, I learn to take advantage of what little downtime I have. Be like Slothogus, I inhale, letting my academic-addled anxieties dissipate as I binge a few episodes of Gilmore Girls or Great British Bake Off with my family. 
Maybe by next year, I will have broken 1:00 in the 100 fly, finished my Girl Scout Gold Award Project, and developed the next cutting-edge software to synthesize singing. Maybe, I’ll turn in my first capstone project for Intro to Computational Linguistics. And maybe, I’ll have added another pillow to the collection, so I can take the day off and have a lie in.
I’ll sleep on it.




Tab 2
THE “Laptop Stickers” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
My laptop is like a passport. It is plastered with stickers all over the outside, inside, and bottom. Each sticker is a stamp, representing a place I’ve been, a passion I’ve pursued, or community I’ve belonged to. These stickers make for an untraditional first impression at a meeting or presentation, but it’s one I’m proud of. Let me take you on a quick tour:
“We < 3 Design,” bottom left corner. Art has been a constant for me for as long as I can remember. Today my primary engagement with art is through design. I’ve spent entire weekends designing websites and social media graphics for my companies. Design means more to me than just branding and marketing; it gives me the opportunity to experiment with texture, perspective, and contrast, helping me refine my professional style.
“Common Threads,” bottom right corner. A rectangular black and red sticker displaying the theme of the 2017 TEDxYouth@Austin event. For years I’ve been interested in the street artists and musicians in downtown Austin who are so unapologetically themselves. As a result, I’ve become more open-minded and appreciative of unconventional lifestyles. TED gives me the opportunity to help other youth understand new perspectives, by exposing them to the diversity of Austin where culture is created, not just consumed.
Poop emoji, middle right. My 13-year-old brother often sends his messages with the poop emoji ‘echo effect,’ so whenever I open a new message from him, hundreds of poops elegantly cascade across my screen. He brings out my goofy side, but also helps me think rationally when I am overwhelmed. We don’t have the typical “I hate you, don’t talk to me” siblinghood (although occasionally it would be nice to get away from him); we’re each other’s best friends. Or at least he’s mine.
“Lol ur not Harry Styles,” upper left corner. Bought in seventh grade and transferred from my old laptop, this sticker is torn but persevering with layers of tape. Despite conveying my fangirl-y infatuation with Harry Styles’ boyband, One Direction, for me Styles embodies an artist-activist who uses his privilege for the betterment of society. As a $42K donor to the Time’s Up Legal Defense Fund, a hair donor to the Little Princess Trust, and promoter of LGBTQ+ equality, he has motivated me to be a more public activist instead of internalizing my beliefs.
“Catapult,” middle right. This is the logo of a startup incubator where I launched my first company, Threading Twine. I learned that business can provide others access to fundamental human needs, such as economic empowerment of minorities and education. In my career, I hope to be a corporate advocate for the empowerment of women, creating large-scale impact and deconstructing institutional boundaries that obstruct women from working in high-level positions. Working as a women’s rights activist will allow me to engage in creating lasting movements for equality, rather than contributing to a cycle that elevates the stances of wealthy individuals.
“Thank God it’s Monday,” sneakily nestled in the upper right corner. Although I attempt to love all my stickers equally (haha), this is one of my favorites. I always want my association with work to be positive.
And there are many others, including the horizontal, yellow stripes of the Human Rights Campaign; “The Team,” a sticker from the Model G20 Economics Summit where I collaborated with youth from around the globe; and stickers from “Kode with Klossy,” a community of girls working to promote women’s involvement in underrepresented fields.
When my computer dies (hopefully not for another few years), it will be like my passport expiring. It’ll be difficult leaving these moments and memories behind, but I probably won’t want these stickers in my 20s anyways (except Harry Styles, that’s never leaving). My next set of stickers will reveal my next set of aspirations. They hold the key to future paths I will navigate, knowledge I will gain, and connections I will make.


Tab 3
THE “PUNK ROCK PHILOSOPHER” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
This was written for the Common App college application essays, and works for prompts 1 and 7 (or none of them, because the author is that cool):
I am on Oxford Academy’s Speech and Debate Team, in both the Parliamentary Debate division and the Lincoln-Douglass debate division. I write screenplays, short stories, and opinionated blogs and am a regular contributor to my school literary magazine, The Gluestick. I have accumulated over 300 community service hours that includes work at homeless shelters, libraries, and special education youth camps. I have been evaluated by the College Board and have placed within the top percentile.
But I am not any of these things. I am not a test score, nor a debater, nor a writer. I am an anti-nihilist punk rock philosopher. And I became so when I realized three things:
1) That the world is ruled by underwear. There is a variety of underwear for a variety of people. You have your ironed briefs for your businessmen, your soft cottons for the average, and hemp-based underwear for your environmental romantics. But underwear do not only tell us about who we are, they also influence our daily interactions in ways most of us don’t even understand. For example, I have a specific pair of underwear that is holey, worn out but surprisingly comfortable. And despite how trivial underwear might be, when I am wearing my favorite pair, I feel as if I am on top of the world. In any case, these articles of clothing affect our being and are the unsung heroes of comfort.
2) When I realized I cannot understand the world. I recently debated at the Orange County Speech League Tournament, within the Parliamentary Division. This specific branch of debate is an hour long, and consists of two parties debating either side of a current political issue. In one particular debate, I was assigned the topic: “Should Nation States eliminate nuclear arms?” It so happened that I was on the negative side and it was my job to convince the judges that countries should continue manufacturing nuclear weapons. During the debate, something strange happened: I realized that we are a special breed of species, that so much effort and resources are invested to ensure mutual destruction. And I felt that this debate in a small college classroom had elucidated something much more profound about the scale of human existence. In any case, I won 1st place at the tournament, but as the crowd cheered when my name was called to stand before an audience of hundreds of other debaters, and I flashed a victorious smile at the cameras, I couldn’t help but imagine that somewhere at that moment a nuclear bomb was being manufactured, adding to an ever-growing stockpile of doom. And that’s when I realized that the world was something I will never understand.
3) When I realized I was a punk rocker philosopher. One summer night, my friend took me to an underground hardcore punk rock show. It was inside a small abandoned church. After the show, I met and became a part of this small community. Many were lost and on a constant soul-search, and to my surprise, many, like myself, did not have a blue Mohawk or a nose piercing. Many were just ordinary people discussing Nietzsche, string theory, and governmental ideologies. Many were also artists creating promotional posters and inventive slogans for stickers. They were all people my age who could not afford to be part of a record label and did something extraordinary by playing in these abandoned churches, making their own CDs and making thousands of promotional buttons by hand. I realized then that punk rock is not about music nor is it a guy with a blue Mohawk screaming protests. Punk rock is an attitude, a mindset, and very much a culture. It is an antagonist to the conventional. It means making the best with what you have to contribute to a community. This was when I realized that I was a punk rock philosopher.
The world I come from consists of underwear, nuclear bombs, and punk rockers. And I love this world. My world is inherently complex, mysterious, and anti-nihilist. I am David Phan, somebody who spends his weekends debating in a three piece suit, other days immersed within the punk rock culture, and some days writing opinionated blogs about underwear.
But why college? I want a higher education. I want more than just the textbook fed classrooms in high school. A community which prizes revolutionary ideals, a sharing of multi-dynamical perspectives, an environment that ultimately acts as a medium for movement, similar to the punk rock community. I do not see college as a mere stepping stone for a stable career or a prosperous life, but as a supplement for knowledge and self-empowerment; it is a social engine that will jettison us to our next paradigm shift.


Tab 4
The “Deli Connections” College Essay Example
Hey Mike, I need a Godfather Sub, no tomato, and a Foot Surfer without avocado! The biggest hit of the day approaches as the clock ticks down to 12:00 noon. I rush over the order tickets. The bell chimes, the door swings open, and the guys working construction on the Jupiter Medical Center flood the deli. Working at Rinaldi’s is more than just a source of income; it is a microcosm of who I have become: a multilingual student committed to understanding and engaging in global affairs; an independent learner able to balance my intellectual and artistic pursuits with the need to structure my time and refine my skills; someone who steps into the shoes of others, and considers issues from contrasting perspectives.
I grew up in Briarcliff Manor, a small homogeneous town in New York State. Since birth, I had known everybody, every street, and every waiter at Squire’s, where I got the crinkly fries and chicken tenders. I was perfectly happy in my hometown, neither traveling nor speaking other languages. In 8th grade, my family’s move to Jupiter, Florida, near Miami, was a shock that led to a massive cultural awakening. I dove into my new surroundings and began working at a popular local deli: Jupiter Rinaldi’s.
Qué le gustaría pedir, señor? Interacting with local deli customers, many of whom hail from Spanish-speaking countries, ignites my eagerness to learn their language and experience their cultures. I develop an empathy for these workmen who come in sweaty, tired, hungry, and pressed for time on their lunch break, yet hesitate to order in English. I love to see the joy on their faces and to hear them laugh when I speak their native language. The deli becomes my daily classroom: real interactions replace vocabulary lists. I realize that communicating across language barriers is a super power, opening infinite possibilities to connect with people.
Interacting with customers at the deli catalyzes my linguistic journey. One day, my Spanish teacher introduces himself in German, which sounds beautiful and rich. I immediately install Duolingo and practice. My enthusiasm for Spanish initially leads to studying German, then studying the cyrillic alphabet for Russian, then memorizing over 60 Hiragana and Katakana characters for Japanese. Now I am watching documentaries and Netflix series in other languages, reading books like “Western Philosophy in Simple Spanish” and “World War 1 in Simple German,” (by Olly Richards, leader of the YouTube language dorks). I even watch SpongeBob, my favorite childhood show, in German. I link my passion for languages to my love of history and am becoming a self-made historian. “Das Boot,” “Downfall,” and “Babylon Berlin,” subtitled in English, acquaint my ear with German, but also immerse me in the Weimar Republic and WWII. I examine major events of the 20th century, in Germany and the USSR, and develop an understanding of how propaganda campaigns weaponize entire generations for their own gain. I grow aware of the ever-present danger when history repeats itself.
Everything exact, all right? my boss Mike always exclaims. Integral to my deli job is running the meat slicer so that the slices come out right: not too thin, not too thick. I’ve learned to calibrate the thickness of the slice, place the correct amount of pressure on the adjustable plate, show up on time, shoulder responsibility, do what I’m told, respect hierarchy, and, as taught by my parents, always try my best. I use my time efficiently, develop a daily pattern, build my days around work, and exercise at Topper Fitness after my shift. 
Perfecting my slicing extends far beyond deli meats to include refining a Hendrix riff for days on my fittingly Irish-green stratocaster, or honing my collection of ridiculously obscure Major League Baseball statistics. Serving customers equips me to mediate arguments among friends, and forging a family at Rinaldi’s assures me that I can make any community my home.


Tab 5
The “Travel and Language” College Essay Example
Written for the Common App college application essays “Tell us your story” prompt. This essay could work for prompts 1 and 7 for the Common App.
When I was very little, I caught the travel bug. It started after my grandparents first brought me to their home in France and I have now been to twenty-nine different countries. Each has given me a unique learning experience.
At five, I marveled at the Eiffel Tower in the City of Lights. When I was eight, I stood in the heart of Piazza San Marco feeding hordes of pigeons, then glided down Venetian waterways on sleek gondolas. At thirteen, I saw the ancient, megalithic structure of Stonehenge and walked along the Great Wall of China, amazed that the thousand-year-old stones were still in place.
It was through exploring cultures around the world that I first became interested in language.
It began with French, which taught me the importance of pronunciation. I remember once asking a store owner in Paris where Rue des Pyramides was. But when I pronounced it PYR-a-mides instead of pyr-A-mides, with more accent on the A, she looked at me bewildered.
In the eighth grade, I became fascinated with Spanish and aware of its similarities with English through cognates. Baseball in Spanish, for example, is béisbol, which looks different but sounds nearly the same. This was incredible to me as it made speech and comprehension more fluid, and even today I find that cognates come to the rescue when I forget how to say something in Spanish.
Then, in high school, I developed an enthusiasm for Chinese. As I studied Chinese at my school, I marveled how if just one stroke was missing from a character, the meaning is lost. I loved how long words were formed by combining simpler characters, so Huǒ (火) meaning fire and Shān (山) meaning mountain can be joined to create Huǒshān (火山), which means volcano. I love spending hours at a time practicing the characters and I can feel the beauty and rhythm as I form them.
Interestingly, after studying foreign languages, I was further intrigued by my native tongue. Through my love of books and fascination with developing a sesquipedalian lexicon (learning big words), I began to expand my English vocabulary. Studying the definitions prompted me to inquire about their origins, and suddenly I wanted to know all about etymology, the history of words. My freshman year I took a world history class and my love for history grew exponentially. To me, history is like a great novel, and it is especially fascinating because it took place in my own world.
But the best dimension that language brought to my life is interpersonal connection. When I speak with people in their native language, I find I can connect with them on a more intimate level. I’ve connected with people in the most unlikely places, finding a Bulgarian painter to use my few Bulgarian words with in the streets of Paris, striking up a conversation in Spanish with an Indian woman who used to work at the Argentinian embassy in Mumbai, and surprising a library worker by asking her a question in her native Mandarin.
I want to study foreign language and linguistics in college because, in short, it is something that I know I will use and develop for the rest of my life. I will never stop traveling, so attaining fluency in foreign languages will only benefit me. In the future, I hope to use these skills as the foundation of my work, whether it is in international business, foreign diplomacy, or translation.
I think of my journey as best expressed through a Chinese proverb that my teacher taught me, “I am like a chicken eating at a mountain of rice.” Each grain is another word for me to learn as I strive to satisfy my unquenchable thirst for knowledge.
Today, I still have the travel bug, and now, it seems, I am addicted to language too.


Tab 6
The “What Rocks Tell Us” Example College Essay Example
Growing up, I kept my head to the ground-literally.
I frequently searched the soil, collecting interesting rocks:, whether tucked beneath bushes, in forgotten cupholders, or even hidden in the tiny, useless front pockets of women’s jeans. I continue to collect rocks to this day because I believe that valuable lessons can be extracted from them. My collection is in no way expensive or high quality, but is instead rich in memories.
So what have I learned from my collection?
“Dragon egg”: When I was younger, my friends and I gathered fist-sized stones and pretended they were dragon eggs. We’d feed them magical soups (composed of shampoo, daisies, and glitter), which made the rocks sparkle in the sunshine. Out of sentimentality, I kept my dragon egg, because it reminds me never to lose my “sparkle” or creativity. Nowadays, I manifest this creativity through various outlets. I practice Minhwa, traditional Korean watercolor painting, with my mom bringing Korean folktale characters and scenery to life. I often play the piano, enjoying and treasuring music as a hobby. I even incorporate this “sparkle” into my outfits, adopting a wide range of fashion styles from Y2K, dark academia, to “Shrek-inspired.”. My creative hobbies are important for me to maintain balance-giving myself the rejuvenation and reflection needed to breathe fire into other aspects of my life.
Cracked pavement: My penchant for collecting shards of cracked pavement mirrors my love for tennis and sports, as both exemplify the beauty of resilience. Just as I’ve learned to appreciate the intricate textures and patterns in discarded concrete, I’ve honed my skills on the tennis court, eventually securing a spot on the varsity girls’ tennis team. These experiences have taught me that success is born from dedication and a willingness to find beauty in the journey, even amidst the cracks.
Sedimentary stones: Composed of diverse clasts-the rock equivalent of crumbs-sedimentary stones symbolize the intentional, purposeful role I’ve played in designing my academic journey. My passion for learning drives me to explore unique and specialized courses like Auto and Human Anatomy, which not only challenge my intellect but also resonate with real-world applications. And I don’t study to just do well on a test-I deeply contemplate how to apply course material in different aspects of education and life. For example, APUSH didn’t just teach me history, but also how to be a better leader. Analyzing documents throughout history has helped me successfully form innovative and effective policies leading SciOly and HOSA. Like sedimentary rocks, I collect “clasts,”, becoming more resilient, capable, and stronger along the way.
Patio stone: An ordinary stone taken from the bed of rocks on my patio left a small gap, from which a mystery tree now sprouts. In the seven years and four months since I first noticed it, I have been unable to identify what kind of tree it is. In that time, I have spent 2000 hours studying trees, rocks, and rivers and have dedicated 500 hours of that time learning how to identify 250+ different trees. However, I don’t mind the fact that I can’t identify the mystery tree; it reminds me that there is still more to discover, learn about, and study. Every glance at the tree (which quite literally “stumps” me) is a reminder to appreciate my growth and to continue to strive, even in rocky conditions.
In the pensive moments when I scan the ground for rocks, I find profound lessons hidden within the mundane. These unassuming fragments of the Earth’s history have been my unlikely mentors. Each rock is a reminder that growth and wisdom are found in the simplest of things, and as I reflect on these silent, unchanging witnesses of time, I am inspired to continue my journey.
Taking the next step, I plunge my hands into the deep, earthy soil once more. What kind of rock will I uncover? And where will it bring me next?




Tab 7
The “Grocery List” College Essay Example
The grocery list grew moist and crinkly in my hand. Seasoned shoppers circled the produce section, shaking excess water off leafy greens and slapping watermelons to test their ripeness. Meanwhile, I stared blankly at the shelves, baffled by the seemingly identical cilantro and parsley. I felt berry out of place.
When COVID hit, my mom shielded herself from the public due to her asthma. With our family’s main grocery shopper sidelined, someone needed to step up. 
That person was not my dad. 
On one trip, he committed three atrocious crimes that locked him in “husband jail”: mistaking green onion for leek, adding two dozen eggs to the 30 already in the fridge, and buying soymilk that poured out chunky. 
Thus, I volunteered to rescue the situation. Despite equally catastrophic results, my mom appreciated my willingness to help, which encouraged me to continue. As I shopped more often, my knowledge of foods broadened, and I no longer needed my mom’s list. Without it, I began to explore previously hidden corners of the store.
As a child, I embodied the “chicken tenders and fries” spirit. Once, after I was forced to try Mom’s roasted eggplant, tears streamed down my face in defiance. Slowly, grocery shopping introduced me to shelves full of flavors. One by one, falafel, goat cheese, and even beef tongue appeared in my basket. While expanding my palate, I also grew curious about fellow shoppers’ tastes. 
Why did that man buy six cartons of cashew milk? Do more people buy organic lemonade despite it being loaded with sugar? These questions sparked my interest in consumer behaviors, leading me to the Freakonomics series, the work of behavioral economist Richard Thaler, and eventually my research on how economic factors influence youth voting behavior.
But it wasn’t just the food that nourished me. 
One day, I heard drums coming from a checkout line. There, I met Siaka, an African cashier playing the djembe. I didn’t expect him to want to talk to me, but he cheerfully described how drumming connected back to his childhood in Mali. Another time, Brian the butcher asked me to solve a culinary puzzle: why do Asian shoppers often ask for two vertical cuts in a rack of ribs? I eagerly explained why sweet and sour ribs required such unusual specifications, and we bonded over my culture.
Growing up in a “parents talk, you listen” household, I wasn’t used to initiating leisurely conversations with adults outside my home. By chatting with Siaka, Brian, and others, I realized that each stranger has a unique story waiting to be discovered. Last summer, I had the opportunity to uncover the experiences of the Children’s Museum educators over bowls of bibimbap and pasta. In just eight weeks, strangers became storytellers, and coworkers became friends.
My interactions with others transcended words, however.
At home, my parents didn’t expect me to help other than getting the mail and taking the trash out. In the grocery store, I found myself more useful. When a customer accidentally triggered a domino effect of apples, I chased them down. When a lady in a wheelchair reached for a salad, I grabbed it for her. These are small gestures but exemplify what positive change means to me: helping one person at a time. 
With this spirit, I enjoyed spending ten minutes explaining the Pennsylvania voting process to one student, patiently coaching a boy to hit a golf ball out of the sand, and teaching an Afghani refugee to solve an algebra problem. And, of course, shopping for my mom.  
Three years ago, grocery shopping started as a daunting task; never did I imagine it would become an experience of self-exploration and connecting with others. Looking ahead, life will certainly offer other intimidating responsibilities-paying taxes, fixing a leaky faucet, and cooking, to name a few. When I take these tasks on, what new horizons will I discover?
Only thyme will tell.


Tab 8
The “Porcelain God” College Essay Example
Essay written for the “topic of your choice” prompt for the 2012 Common Application college application essays.
Bowing down to the porcelain god, I emptied the contents of my stomach. Foaming at the mouth, I was ready to pass out. My body couldn’t stop shaking as I gasped for air, and the room started spinning.
Ten minutes prior, I had been eating dinner with my family at a Chinese restaurant, drinking chicken-feet soup. My mom had specifically asked the waitress if there were peanuts in it, because when I was two we found out that I am deathly allergic to them. When the waitress replied no, I went for it. Suddenly I started scratching my neck, feeling the hives that had started to form. I rushed to the restroom to throw up because my throat was itchy and I felt a weight on my chest. I was experiencing anaphylactic shock, which prevented me from taking anything but shallow breaths. I was fighting the one thing that is meant to protect me and keep me alive – my own body.
At five years old, I couldn’t comprehend what had happened. All I knew was that I felt sick, and I was waiting for my mom to give me something to make it better. I thought my parents were superheroes; surely they would be able to make well again. But I became scared when I heard the fear in their voices as they rushed me to the ER.
After that incident, I began to fear. I became scared of death, eating, and even my own body. As I grew older, I became paranoid about checking food labels and I avoided eating if I didn’t know what was in the food. I knew what could happen if I ate one wrong thing, and I wasn’t willing to risk it for a snack. Ultimately, that fear turned into resentment; I resented my body for making me an outsider.
In the years that followed, this experience and my regular visits to my allergy specialist inspired me to become an allergy specialist. Even though I was probably only ten at the time, I wanted to find a way to help kids like me. I wanted to find a solution so that nobody would have to feel the way I did; nobody deserved to feel that pain, fear, and resentment. As I learned more about the medical world, I became more fascinated with the body’s immune responses, specifically, how a body reacts to allergens. This past summer, I took a month-long course on human immunology at Stanford University. I learned about the different mechanisms and cells that our bodies use in order to fight off pathogens. My desire to major in biology in college has been stimulated by my fascination with the human body, its processes, and the desire to find a way to help people with allergies. I hope that one day I can find a way to stop allergic reactions or at least lessen the symptoms, so that children and adults don’t have to feel the same fear and bitterness that I felt.


Tab 9
The “Five Families” College Essay Example
This essay could work for prompts 1, 2, 5 and 7 for the Common App.
When I was 16, I lived with the Watkins family in Wichita, Kansas. Mrs. Watkins was the coordinator of the foreign exchange student program I was enrolled in. She had a nine year old son named Cody. I would babysit Cody every day after school for at least two to three hours. We would play Scrabble or he would read to me from Charlotte’s Web or The Ugly Duckling. He would talk a lot about his friends and school life, and I would listen to him and ask him the meanings of certain words. He was my first friend in the New World.
My second family was the Martinez family, who were friends of the Watkins’s. The host dad Michael was a high school English teacher and the host mom Jennifer (who had me call her “Jen”) taught elementary school. She had recently delivered a baby, so she was still in the hospital when I moved into their house. The Martinez family did almost everything together. We made pizza together, watched Shrek on their cozy couch together, and went fishing on Sunday together. On rainy days, Michael, Jen and I would sit on the porch and listen to the rain, talking about our dreams and thoughts. Within two months I was calling them mom and dad.
After I finished the exchange student program, I had the option of returning to Korea but I decided to stay in America. I wanted to see new places and meet different people. Since I wasn’t an exchange student anymore, I had the freedom–and burden–of finding a new school and host family on my own. After a few days of thorough investigation, I found the Struiksma family in California. They were a unique group.
The host mom Shellie was a single mom who had two of her own sons and two Russian daughters that she had adopted. The kids always had something warm to eat, and were always on their best behavior at home and in school. It would be fair to say that this was all due to Shellie’s upbringing. My room was on the first floor, right in front of Shellie’s hair salon, a small business that she ran out of her home. In the living room were six or seven huge amplifiers and a gigantic chandelier hung from the high ceiling. The kitchen had a bar. At first, the non-stop visits from strangers made me nervous, but soon I got used to them. I remember one night, a couple barged into my room while I was sleeping. It was awkward.
After a few months I realized we weren’t the best fit. In the nicest way possible, I told them I had to leave. They understood.
The Ortiz family was my fourth family. Kimberly, the host mom, treated me the same way she treated her own son. She made me do chores: I fixed dinner, fed their two dogs Sassy and Lady, and once a week I cleaned the bathroom. I also had to follow some rules: No food in my room, no using the family computer, no lights on after midnight, and no ride unless it was an emergency. The first couple of months were really hard to get used to, but eventually I adjusted.
I lived with the Ortiz family for seven months like a monk in the deep forest. However, the host dad Greg’s asthma got worse after winter, so he wanted to move to the countryside. It was unexpected and I only had a week to find a new host family. I asked my friend Danielle if I could live with her until I found a new home. That’s how I met the Dirksen family, my fifth family.
The Dirksen family had three kids. They were all different. Danielle liked bitter black coffee, Christian liked energy drinks, and Becca liked sweet lemon tea. Dawn, the host mom didn’t like winter, and Mark, the host dad, didn’t like summer. After dinner, we would all play Wii Sports together. I was the king of bowling, and Dawn was the queen of tennis. I don’t remember a single time that they argued about the games. Afterward, we would gather in the living room and Danielle would play the piano while the rest of us sang hymns.
Of course, those 28 months were too short to fully understand all five families, but I learned from and was shaped by each of them. By teaching me English, nine year-old Cody taught me the importance of being able to learn from anyone; the Martinez family showed me the value of spending time together as a family; the Struiksma family taught me to reserve judgment about divorced women and adopted children; Mrs. Ortiz taught me the value of discipline and the Dirksen family taught me the importance of appreciating one another’s different qualities.
Getting along with other people is necessary for anyone and living with five families has made me more sensitive to others’ needs: I have learned how to recognize when someone needs to talk, when I should give advice and when to simply listen, and when someone needs to be left alone; in the process, I have become much more adaptable. I’m ready to change, learn, and be shaped by my future families.


Tab 10
THE “FOOD” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “I Love/I Know” Type
I’ve spent most of my life as an anti-vegetable carboholic.  For years, processed snack foods ruled the kitchen kingdom of my household and animal products outnumbered plant-based offerings. 
My transformation began with my mom’s cancer diagnosis. My mom went on a 100% whole food plant-based diet. I fully embraced this new eating philosophy to show my support. Eager to figure out the whole “vegan” thing, the two of us started binge-watching health documentaries such as “What the Health” and “Forks Over Knives”. We read all the books by the featured doctors like “The China Study” and “How Not To Die”. I became entranced by the world of nutritional science and how certain foods could help prevent cancer or boost metabolism. 
Each new food I discovered gave me an education on the role diet plays on health. I learned that, by eating sweet potatoes and brown rice, you could cure acne and heart disease. I discovered eating leafy greens with citrus fruits could boost iron absorption rates. I loved pairing my foods to create the perfect macronutrient balance. Did you know beans and rice make a complete protein? 
Food has also turned me into a sustainability nut. Living plant-based also saves the planet from the impact of animal agriculture. For the same amount of land space, a farmer can produce 200 kilograms of soybeans versus 16 kilograms of beef. I do my part to have as small of an ecological footprint as I can. I stopped using plastic snack bags and instead turned to reusable beeswax wraps. My favorite reusable appliance is my foldable straw. If I am going to nourish my body, shouldn’t I also want to nourish the earth? 
My journey toward healthy living led me to becoming co-leader of the Northern Nevada PlantPure Pod, “Biggest Little Plant Pod”, a group dedicated to spreading the message about the whole food plant-based lifestyle. We are currently working on a restaurant campaign to encourage local eateries to create a plant-based, oil-free menu option and become PlantPure certified. After discovering how many restaurants use oil in their cooking, I decided I needed to open a plant-based oil free cafe to make up for this gap. My dream is to open up my very own affordable oatmeal cafe based on my Instagram page, morning_mOATivations. And I know that oatmeal isn’t the sexiest superfood out there, so here’s my sales pitch: I’m going to make oatmeal the Beyonce of the breakfast world- sweet, sassy, and power packed. This allows me to educate people about nutritional science through the stomach. 
Finally, I am a strong proponent of hands-on experience for learning what good food looks and tastes like, so cooking is one of my favorite ways to teach the benefits of a plant-based lifestyle. Using my taste buds as my textbook to learn which flavors work together and which ones don’t helps me educate, as I’ve found that information tends to stick in a person’s mind once they’ve experienced healthy, delicious foods with their own senses. Our society has taught us that delicious food has to make us feel guilty, when that is simply not the case. The best feeling in the world is falling in love with a dish and then learning all the health benefits that it provides the body.
While my classmates complain about being tired, I have more energy because my body is finally getting the right macros, vitamins, and minerals it needs. This has allowed me to push myself harder physically, excelling in running and earning my high school Cross Country team’s Most Improved award. I’m still a picky eater. But the foods I am particular about have changed. Rather than a carboholic, I choose to call myself a vegeholic.




Tab 11
THE “HAPPINESS SPREADSHEET” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “Essence Object” Type
Meditation over a flaxen sunset with a friend and parmesan-topped spaghetti for dinner – “14.” Assignments piling up on my desk as a high fever keeps me sick at home – “3.” Taking a photo excursion through downtown Seattle for a Spanish project – “15.” For the past 700 days and counting, the Happiness Spreadsheet has been my digital collection for documenting numerical, descriptive, and graphical representations of my happiness. Its instructions are simple: Open the Google Sheet, enter a number between 1 and 20 that best represents my level of happiness, and write a short comment describing the day. But the practical aspect of the spreadsheet is only a piece of what it has represented in my life.
A “14” etched on November 15, 2018, marked the first Lakeside Cooking on the Stove Club meeting. What had started as a farcical proposition of mine transformed into a playground where high school classmates and I convene every two weeks to prepare a savory afternoon snack for ourselves. A few months later, a “16” scribbled on February 27, 2019, marked the completion of a fence my Spanish class and I constructed for the dusty soccer field at a small Colombian village. Hard-fought days of mixing cement and transporting supplies had paid off for the affectionate community we had immediately come to love. The Happiness Spreadsheet doesn’t only reflect my own thoughts and emotions; it is an illustration of the fulfillment I get from gifting happiness to others.
If happiness paves the roads of my life, my family is the city intertwined by those roads – each member a distinct neighborhood, a distinct story. In times of stress, whether it be studying for an upcoming derivatives test or presenting my research at an international conference, I dash to my father for help. Coming from the dusty, people-packed backstreets of Thiruvananthapuram, India, he guides me in looking past the chaos and noticing the hidden accomplishments that lie in the corners. When in need of confidence, I find my mother, who taps her experiences living in her tranquil and sturdy tatami-covered home in Hiroshima, Japan, helping me prepare for my first high school dance or my final match in a tennis tournament. Whenever my Happiness Spreadsheet numbers touch lows, my family is always there to level me out to “10.”
The Happiness Spreadsheet is also a battery monitor for enthusiasm. On occasion, it is on full charge, like when I touched the last chord on the piano for my composition’s winner recital or when, one frosty Friday morning, I convinced a teacher to play over the school speakers a holiday medley I’d recorded with a friend. Other times, the battery is depleted, and I am frustrated by writer’s block, when not a single melody, chord, or musical construct crosses my mind. The Happiness Spreadsheet can be a hall of fame, but it can likewise be a catalog of mistakes, burdens, and grueling challenges.
The spreadsheet began on a typical school day when I left my physics class following the most confusing test I’d taken. The idea was born spontaneously at lunch, and I asked two of my friends if they were interested in pursuing this exercise with me. We thought the practice would last only a couple of weeks or months at most, but after reaching 700 days, we now wonder if we’ll ever stop. To this day, I ponder its full importance in my life. With every new number I enter, I recognize that each entry is not what defines me; rather, it is the ever-growing line connecting all the data points that reflects who I am today. With every valley, I force myself onward and with every mountain’s peak, I recognize the valleys I’ve crossed to reach the summit. Where will the Happiness Spreadsheet take me next?




Tab 12
THE “TRANSLATING” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “Skill/Superpower” Type
“.miK ijniM” This is how I wrote my name until I was seven. I was a left-handed kid who wrote from right to left, which made my writing comprehensible only to myself. Only after years of practice did I become an ambidextrous writer who could translate my incomprehensible writing. As I look back on my life, I realized that this was my first act of translation. 
Translation means reinterpreting my Calculus teacher’s description of L’hospital’s rule into a useful tool for solving the limits. As I deciphered complex codes into comprehensible languages like rate of change and speed of an object, I gained the ability to solve even more complicated and fascinating problems. My Calculus teacher often told me, “It’s not until you can teach math concepts to somebody that you understand them completely.” Before I discovered the joy of teaching, I often explained difficult math concepts to my friends as a tool for reviewing what I’d learned. Now, I volunteer to tutor others: as a Korean tutor for friends who love Korean culture and a golf tutor for new team members. Tutoring is how I integrate and strengthen new concepts for myself.  
My talent for translating also applies to my role as a “therapist” for my family and friends. I’m able to identify their real feelings beneath superficial words by translating hand-gestures, facial expressions, and tones. I often put myself into their situation and ask, “What emotional support would I want or need if I was in this situation?” Through these acts of translation, I’ve grown into a more reliable and perceptive friend, daughter, and sister. 
However, my translation can’t accurately account for the experiences I have yet to go through. After realizing the limitations of my experience, I created a bucket list full of activities out of my comfort zone, which includes traveling abroad by myself, publishing my own book, and giving a lecture in front of a crowd. Although it is a mere list written on the front page of my diary, I found myself vividly planning and picturing myself accomplishing those moments. By widening my experiences, I’ll be a therapist who can empathize fully and give meaningful advice based on rich experiences.
My knack for translating has led me to become a real-life Korean language translator. As an English to Korean letter translator in a non-profit organization, Compassion, I serve as a communication bridge between benefactors and children in developing countries, who communicate through monthly letters. I’ve translated hundreds of letters by researching each country to provide context that considers both cultural aspects and nuances of the language. This experience has motivated me to learn languages like Spanish and Mandarin. I’ve realized that learning various languages has been a journey of self-discovery: the way I talk and interact with people changed depending on the language I used. As I get to know more about myself through different languages, I grew more confident to meet new people and build new friendships.
While translating has been a huge part of my life, a professional translator is not my dream job. I want to be an ambulatory care clinical pharmacist who manages the medication of patients with chronic diseases. In fact, translating is a huge part of the job of a clinical pharmacist. I should substitute myself into patients’ situations to respond to their needs effectively, which requires my translating skill as a “therapist.” Moreover, as a clinical pharmacist, I’ll be the patients’ private tutor who not only guides them through the right use of medication but also gives them emotional support. As my qualities as a “therapist” and a “tutor” shaped me into a great translator, I will continue to develop my future as a clinical pharmacist by enhancing and discovering my qualities. In one form or another, I’ve always been and will be a translator.


Tab 13
THE “WHY BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “Career” Type
I sit, cradled by the two largest branches of the Newton Pippin Tree, watching the ether. The Green Mountains of Vermont stretch out indefinitely, and from my elevated vantage point, I feel as though we are peers, motionless in solidarity. I’ve lost my corporeal form and instead, while watching invisible currents drive white leviathans across the sky, have drifted up into the epistemological stream; completely alone with my questions, diving for answers. But a few months ago, I would have considered this an utter waste of time. 
Prior to attending Mountain School, my paradigm was substantially limited; opinions, prejudices, and ideas shaped by the testosterone-rich environment of Landon School. I was herded by result-oriented, fast-paced, technologically-reliant parameters towards psychology and neuroscience (the NIH, a mere 2.11 mile run from my school, is like a beacon on a hill). I was taught that one’s paramount accomplishment should be specialization. 
Subconsciously I knew this was not who I wanted to be and seized the chance to apply to the Mountain School. Upon my arrival, though, I immediately felt I did not belong. I found the general atmosphere of hunky-dory acceptance foreign and incredibly unnerving. 
So, rather than engage, I retreated to what was most comfortable: sports and work. In the second week, the perfect aggregate of the two, a Broomball tournament, was set to occur. Though I had never played before, I had a distinct vision for it, so decided to organize it.
That night, the glow-in-the-dark ball skittered across the ice. My opponent and I, brooms in hand, charged forward. We collided and I banana-peeled, my head taking the brunt of the impact. Stubborn as I was, even with a concussion, I wanted to remain in class and do everything my peers did, but my healing brain protested. My teachers didn’t quite know what to do with me, so, no longer confined to a classroom if I didn’t want to be, I was in limbo. I began wandering around campus with no company except my thoughts. Occasionally, Zora, my English teacher’s dog, would tag along and we’d walk for miles in each other’s silent company. Other times, I found myself pruning the orchard, feeding the school’s wood furnaces, or my new favorite activity, splitting wood. Throughout those days, I created a new-found sense of home in my head.
However, thinking on my own wasn’t enough; I needed more perspectives. I organized raucous late-night discussions about everything from medieval war machines to political theory and  randomly challenged my friends to “say something outrageous and defend it.” And whether we achieve profundity or not, I find myself enjoying the act of discourse itself. As Thoreau writes, “Let the daily tide leave some deposit on these pages, as it leaves, the waves may cast up pearls.” I have always loved ideas, but now understand what it means to ride their waves, to let them breathe and become something other than just answers to immediate problems. 
I am most enamored by ideas that cultivate ingenious and practical enrichments for humanity. I enjoy picking some conundrum, large or small, and puzzling out a solution. Returning from a cross country meet recently, my friend and I, serendipitously, designed a socially responsible disposable water bottle completely on accident. Now we hope to create it.
I am still interested in psychology and neuroscience, but also desire to incorporate contemplative thought into this work, analyzing enigmas from many different perspectives. My internships at the NIH and the National Hospital for Neuroscience and Neurosurgery in London have offered me valuable exposure to research and medicine. But I have come to realize that neither of my previous intended professions allow me to expand consciousness in the way I would prefer. 
After much soul-searching, I have landed on behavioral economics as the perfect synergy of the fields I love. All it took was a knock on the head.




Tab 14
THE “5 FAMILY IDENTITIES” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage, “Identity” Type
“Chris, what would you like to have for Christmas Dinner?“
Suddenly, a miniature gathering of the European Commission glares straight at me. I feel the pressure of picking one option over the other.
 What do I choose? The Roast Duck of Denmark, the Five Fish of Italy, the Turkey of Great Britain, or the Ham of the U.S.? Like the various nations of the European Union, the individual proponents of these culinary varieties are lobbying their interests to me, a miniature Jean-Claude Junker.
Now, you may be asking yourselves: why would I be so pensive over a meal choice?
See, I have been blessed to be a part of what my mother calls the “melting pot of Europe.”  While I was born in England, my brothers were born in Denmark and New York. I have a Swedish sister-in-law, Italian Aunts, an English Uncle, Romanian cousins and an Italo-Danish immigrant father. Every year, that same family gathers together in New York City to celebrate Christmas. While this wonderful kaleidoscope of cultures has caused me to be the ‘peacekeeper’ during meal arbitrations, it has fundamentally impacted my life.  
Our family’s ethnic diversity has meant that virtually each person adheres to a different position on the political spectrum. This has naturally triggered many discussions, ranging from the merits of European single-payer healthcare to those of America’s gun laws, that have often animated our meals. These exact conversations drove me to learn more about what my parents, grandparents, and other relatives were debating with a polite and considerate passion. This ongoing discourse on current events not only initiated my interests in politics and history, but also prepared me greatly for my time as a state-champion debater for Regis’s Public Forum team. In turn, participating in debate has expanded my knowledge regarding matters ranging from civil rights reparations to American redeployment in Iraq, while enriching my capacities to thoughtfully express my views on those and other issues, both during P.F. rounds and at the dinner table.
Just as I’ve learned to understand and bridge the divides between a rich tapestry of cultures in order to develop my familial relations, society’s leadership must also do the same on a grander scale. This awareness incited a passion for statecraft within me – the very art of balancing different perspectives – and therefore a desire to actively engage in government. With my experiences in mind, I felt there was no better place to start than my own neighborhood of Bay Ridge. Young hipsters, a high concentration of seniors, Italian & Irish middle class families, and a growing population of Middle-Eastern Americans help to comprise a district that I have begun serving as the first teenaged member of my local Community Board.  Within my public service capacity, I am committed to making policy judgments (for example, regarding hookah bars, zoning regulations, and park renovation expenses) that are both wise and respectful of my community’s diversity. 
Most importantly, my family has taught me an integral life lesson. As our Christmas Dinner squabbles suggest, seemingly insurmountable impasses can be resolved through respect and dialogue, even producing delicious results! On a grander scale, it has elucidated that truly inclusive discourse and toleration of diverse perspectives render tribalism, sectarianism, and the  divisive aspects of identity politics powerless over our cohesion. I fundamentally value cultural, political, and theological variety; my own microcosm reflecting our global society at large has inspired me to strive to solve the many conflicts of bitterness and sectionalism in our world today. This vocation may come in the form of political leadership that truly respects all perspectives and philosophies, or perhaps as diplomacy facilitating unity between the various nations of the world. The problems I would need to help remedy are numerous and daunting, but our annual Christmas feasts will forever remind me that they can be overcome, and that humanity’s diversity is not a weakness, but a definitive strength.




Tab 15
THE “Coffee Shops + Coffee” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “Home” Type
Before I came to America, I drank Puer Tea with my father every morning in my bedroom, sitting cross-legged on Suzhou-silk mats beside a view of the Lakeside reservoir. Beside a dark end table, we picked up teacups as the mild aroma greeted our noses. As we faced the French window, my father would share the news he read in China Daily: the Syrian civil war, climate change, and gender equality in Hollywood. Most of the time, I only listened. With each piece of news, my curiosity piqued. Secretly, I made a decision that I wanted to be the one to discuss the news with him from my perspective. So, I decided to study in America to learn more about the world.   
After one year’s extensive research and hours of interviews, I came to America for 9th grade and moved in with a host family. But, my new room lacked stories and cups of tea. Fortunately, I found Blue House Cafe on my walk home from church, and started studying there. With white walls, comfortable sofas, and high stools, Blue House is spacious and bright. Hearing people’s stories and looking at their warm smiles when they taste various pastries as I sat by the window, I watched as a production designer scouted locations for his film, or a painter took notes while brainstorming for his freehand brushwork of Blue House. With a cup of coffee, I dig into differential and parametric equations for my upcoming AP Calculus test, learn the nuances of public speaking by watching Michael Sandel’s Justice lectures on my laptop, and plan fundraising events for my non-profit. 
I’ve also learned by watching leaders host meetings at the rectangle conference table at the back of the cafe and I learn from the leaders of meetings, watching as they hold the edge of the table and express their ideas. Similarly, as president of the International Students Club, I invited my teammates to have meetings with me at the cafe. Coordinating the schedule with other members in Blue House has become a frequent event. Consuming several cups of coffee, my team and I have planned Lunar New Year events, field trip to the Golden Gate Bridge, and Chinese lunch in school to help international students feel more at home. Straightening my back and bracing my shoulders, I stood up behind the conference table and expressed my creative ideas passionately. After each meeting, we shared buttermilk coffee-cake.
In my spot next to the window, I also witnessed different kinds of people. I viewed visitors dragging their luggage, women carrying shopping bags, and people wandering in tattered clothes –the diversity of San Francisco. Two years ago I saw volunteers wearing City Impact shirts offering sandwiches and hot chocolate to homeless people outside of the cafe. I investigated more about City Impact and eventually signed up to volunteer. No longer was I a bystander. At holiday outreach events, I prepared and delivered food to homeless people. While sharing my coffee, I listened to a story from an older Chinese man who told me, in Mandarin, how he had been abandoned by his children and felt lonely.
Last summer, I returned to Xiamen, China, and taught my father how to drink coffee. Now, a Chemex and teapot are both on the end table. Instead of simply listening, I shared my experiences as a club president, a community leader, and a volunteer. I showed him my business plan and prototypes. My father raised his cup of coffee and made a toast to me, “Good girl! I am so proud of you.” Then, he patted my head as before. Together, we emptied our cups while the smell of coffee lingered.




Tab 16
THE “KOMBUCHA CLUB” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “Uncommon Extracurricular Activity” Type
I add the critically measured sugary tea mixture to the gallon jar containing the slimy, white, disc-shaped layers of the symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast.
Now to wait.  
After exactly seven days, I pour the liquid into a fermentation-grade glass bottle with a ratio of 20% pomegranate juice and 80% fermented tea. I place it on my kitchen counter, periodically checking it to relieve the built-up CO2.
Finally, after an additional seventy-two hours, the time comes to try it. I crack the seal on the bottle, leaning over to smell what I assume will be a tangy, fruity, delicious pomegranate solution. and it smells like rotten eggs. The insufferable stench fills my nostrils and crushes my confidence. I’m momentarily taken aback, unable to understand how I went wrong when I followed the recipe perfectly. 
My issue wasn’t misreading the recipe or failing to follow a rule, it was bypassing my creative instincts and forgetting the unpredictable nature of fermentation. I needed to trust the creative side of kombucha- the side that takes people’s perfectionist energy and explodes it into a puddle of rotten egg smelling ‘booch (my preferred name for the drink- not “fermented, effervescent liquid from a symbiotic culture of acetic acid bacteria and yeast”). I was too caught up in the side that requires extreme preciseness to notice when the balance between perfectionism and imperfectionism was being thrown off. The key, I have learned, is knowing when to prioritize following the recipe and when to let myself be creative. Sure, there are scientific variables such as proximity to heat sources and how many grams of sugar to add. But, there’s also person-dependent variables like how long I decide to ferment it, what fruits I decide will be a fun combination, and which friend I got my first SCOBY from (taking “symbiotic” to a new level).
I often find myself feeling pressured to choose one side or the other, one extreme over the alternative. I’ve been told that I can either be a meticulous scientist or a messy artist, but to be both is an unacceptable contradiction. However, I choose a grey area; a place where I can channel my creativity into the sciences, as well as channel my precision into my photography.
I still have the first photo I ever took on the first camera I ever had. Or rather, the first camera I ever made. Making that pinhole camera was truly a painstaking process: take a cardboard box, tap it shut, and poke a hole in it. Okay, maybe it wasn’t that hard. But learning the exact process of taking and developing a photo in its simplest form, the science of it, is what drove me to pursue photography. I remember being so unhappy with the photo I took; it was faded, underexposed, and imperfect. For years, I felt incredibly pressured to try and perfect my photography. It wasn’t until I was defeated, staring at a puddle of kombucha, that I realized that there doesn’t always have to be a standard of perfection in my art, and that excited me. 
So, am I a perfectionist? Or do I crave pure spontaneity and creativity? Can I be both?
Perfectionism leaves little to be missed. With a keen eye, I can quickly identify my mistakes and transform them into something with purpose and definitude. On the other hand, imperfection is the basis for change and for growth. My resistance against perfectionism is what has allowed me to learn to move forward by seeing the big picture; it has opened me to new experiences, like bacteria cross-culturing to create something new, something different, something better. I am not afraid of change or adversity, though perhaps I am afraid of conformity. To fit the mold of perfection would compromise my creativity, and I am not willing to make that sacrifice.




Tab 17
THE “MOMENTS WHERE THE SECONDS STAND STILL” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Montage Essay, “Other/Advanced” type
I hold onto my time as dearly as my Scottish granny holds onto her money. I’m careful about how I spend it and fearful of wasting it. Precious minutes can show someone I care and can mean the difference between accomplishing a goal or being too late to even start and my life depends on carefully budgeting my time for studying, practicing with my show choir, and hanging out with my friends. However, there are moments where the seconds stand still.
It is already dark when I park in my driveway after a long day at school and rehearsals. I can’t help but smile when I see my dog Kona bounce with excitement, then slide across the tile floor to welcome me as I open the door. I run with him into my parent’s bedroom, where my mom, dad, and sister are waiting for me. We pile onto my parents’ bed to talk about what’s going on in our lives, plan our next trip to the beach, tell jokes, and “spill tea.” They help me see challenges with a realistic perspective, grounding me in what matters. Not paying attention to the clock, I allow myself to relax for a brief moment in my busy life.
Laughter fills the show choir room as my teammates and I pass the time by telling bad jokes and breaking out in random bursts of movement. Overtired, we don’t even realize we’re entering the fourth hour of rehearsal. This same sense of camaraderie follows us onstage, where we become so invested in the story we are portraying we lose track of time. My show choir is my second family. I realize I choreograph not for recognition, but to help sixty of my best friends find their footing. At the same time, they help me find my voice.
The heavy scuba gear jerks me under the icy water, and exhilaration washes over me. Lost in the meditative rolling effect of the tide and the hum of the vast ocean, I feel present. I dive deeper to inspect a vibrant community of creatures, and we float together, carefree and synchronized. My fascination with marine life led me to volunteer as an exhibit interpreter for the Aquarium of the Pacific, where I share my love for the ocean. Most of my time is spent rescuing animals from small children and, in turn, keeping small children from drowning in the tanks. I’ll never forget the time when a visiting family and I were so involved in discussing ocean conservation that, before I knew it, an hour had passed. Finding this mutual connection over the love of marine life and the desire to conserve the ocean environment keeps me returning each summer. 
“Why don’t we have any medical supplies?” The thought screams through my mind as I carry a sobbing girl on my back across campus in search of an ice pack and ankle wrap. She had just fallen while performing, and I could relate to the pain and fear in her eyes. The chaos of the show becomes distant, and I devote my time to bringing her relief, no matter how long it may take. I find what I need to treat her injury in the sports medicine training room. I didn’t realize she would be the first of many patients I would tend to in this training room. Since then, I’ve launched a sports medicine program to provide care to the 500-person choir program.  
Saturday morning bagels with my family. Singing backup for Barry Manilow with my choir. Swimming with sea turtles in the Pacific. Making my teammate smile even though he’s in pain. These are the moments I hold onto, the ones that define who I am, and who I want to be. For me, time isn’t just seconds ticking by on a clock, it’s how I measure what matters.


Tab 18
THE “iTaylor” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Narrative Essay, Undefined Type
Are you tired of seeing an iPhone everywhere? Samsung glitchy? It’s time for a change. I present to you, the iTaylor. I am the iTaylor. On the outside, I look like any smart phone, but when you open my settings and explore my abilities, you will find I have many unique features.
The iTaylor’s best feature is its built-in optimism. Thanks to my positivity, I was chosen to give the morning announcements freshman year. Now, I am the alarm clock for the 1,428 students of Fox Lane High School. For the past three years, I have been starting everyone’s morning with a bubbly, “Good morning, foxes!” and ending with “Have a marvelous Monday,” “Terrific Tuesday” or “Phenomenal Friday!”  My adjective-a-day keeps people listening, gives me conversation starters with faculty, and solicits fun suggestions from my friends.
Next up, language settings. I’ve worked hard to be bilingual so the iTaylor can be set to either English or Spanish. Fun fact: In middle school, I set my phone to Spanish so that messages like “Alexis te envió un mensaje en Instagram,” would increase my fluency. I learned nuances of the language by watching Spanish sitcoms like Siete Vidas and Spanish movies like Como Agua Para Chocolate. I appreciate the emphasis Spanish culture places on relationships, the way siblings take care of each other, and how grandparents’ wisdom is valued. Inspired, I began creating family events and even making efforts to grow closer to my second cousins.
At eight years old, I was diagnosed with what some might call a glitch: epilepsy. Fortunately, a new IOS software update cured my condition by the age of 15, but through epilepsy, I gained a love of exploration. Whereas at 10, I couldn’t bathe without supervision, I now enjoy snorkeling in unknown waters. While at 11, I couldn’t be left alone with my friends, I now explore the subways, crowded streets, and Broadway shows of New York City. Overcoming epilepsy taught me to take risks and explore new places.
This brings us to the iTaylor location settings. Two summers ago, I travelled to Ecuador to live with a friend’s family and teach Spanish theater to third graders. The experience implanted a “cookie” in me, filling me with a desire to learn about different cultures. I brought this desire home to a volunteer position at a local program for immigrant children. I helped the kids make presentations about their places of origin, including Mexico, Guatemala, and Honduras. Also, as resident tour guide and ambassador for exchange students at my school, I’ve discovered North African fusion music from Selima, learned German slang from Henrike, and helped Saidimar prepare his Mr.Sulu campaign, a regional pageant in the Philippines. It became clear that the English language, one I took for granted, is the central feature that brings groups together.
This past summer, I brought my talents to Scotland, playing the dual role of  Artistic Director and leading character for Geek the Musical. I worked to promote the show in the Edinburgh Fringe Festival against 53,232 shows, reinventing ways to motivate the cast and connect with strangers from all over the world. We learned the more we connected, the more our audience grew. I applied these skills to my leadership positions at home, including my High School Theater Group, Players. I’m now better at creating a marketing strategy that includes door-to-door sales, print advertising, and identifying broader target audiences to fill seats.
The rollout plan for the iTaylor is to introduce it to the theater market. My goal is to use performance and storytelling to expose audiences to different cultures, religions, and points of view. Perhaps if we all learned more about each other’s lifestyles, the world would be more empathetic and integrated. 


Tab 19
THE “FIGURING OUT WHAT REALLY MATTERED CHALLENGE” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Narrative Essay
“Perfect as the wing of a bird may be, it will never enable the bird to fly if unsupported by the air.” –Ivan Pavlov 
Upon graduation, I will be able to analyze medieval Spanish poems using literary terms and cultural context, describe the electronegativity trends on the periodic table, and identify when to use logarithmic differentiation to simplify a derivative problem. Despite knowing how to execute these very particular tasks, I currently fail to understand how to change a tire, how to do my taxes efficiently, or how to obtain a good insurance policy. A factory-model school system that has been left essentially unchanged for nearly a century has been the driving force in my educational development.
I have been conditioned to complete tasks quickly, efficiently, and with an advanced understanding. I measured my self-worth as my ability to outdo my peers academically, thinking my scores were the only aspect that defined me; and they were. I was getting everything right. Then, I ran for Student Government and failed. Rejection. I didn’t even make it past the first round of cuts. How could that be? I was statistically a smart kid with a good head on my shoulders, right? Surely someone had to have made a mistake. Little did I know, this was my first exposure to meaning beyond numbers.
As I was rejected from StuGo for the second year in a row, I discovered I had been wrongfully measuring my life through numbers–my football statistics, my test scores, my age, my height (I’m short). I had the epiphany that oh wait, maybe it was my fault that I had never prioritized communication skills, or open-mindedness (qualities my fellow candidates possessed). Maybe it was me. That must be why I always had to be the one to approach people during my volunteer hours at the public library to offer help–no one ever asked me for it. I resolved to alter my mindset, taking a new approach to the way I lived. From now on I would emphasize qualitative experiences over quantitative skills. 
I had never been more uncomfortable. I forced myself to learn to be vulnerable by asking questions even if I was terrified of being wrong. My proficiency in using data evidence could not teach me how to communicate with young children at church, nor could my test scores show me how to be more open to criticism. The key to all of these skills, I was to discover, happened to be learning from those around me. Turns out, I couldn’t do everything by myself.
The process of achieving this new mindset came through the cultivation of relationships. I became fascinated by the new perspectives each person in my life could offer if I really took the time to connect. Not only did I improve my listening skills, but I began to consider the big-picture consequences my engagements could have. People interpret situations differently due to their own cultural contexts, so I had to learn to pay more attention to detail to understand every point of view. I took on the state of what I like to call collaborative independence, and to my delight, I was elected to StuGo after my third year of trying.
Not long ago, I would have fallen apart at the presence of any uncertainty. As I further accept and advance new life skills, the more I realize how much remains uncertain in the world. After all, it is quite possible my future job doesn’t exist yet, and that’s okay. I can’t conceivably plan out my entire life at the age of 17, but what I can do is prepare myself to take on the unknown, doing my best to accompany others. Hopefully, my wings continue enabling me to fly, but it is going to take more than just me and my wings; I have to continue putting my faith in the air around me.


Tab 20
THE “PARENTS’ RELATIONSHIP” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Narrative Essay, “Challenge” Type
My mom opened Kanishka’s Gastropub in 2013. I was ecstatic. We would become the first Mother-Son Indian duo on Food Network peeling potatoes, skinning chicken, and grinding spices, sharing our Bengali recipes with the world. 
However, the restaurant tore apart my parent’s relationship. Two years after opening, my dad started coming home late most nights, plastered from “happy hour with work colleagues.” My mom, trying to balance her day job at Kaiser and owning a restaurant, poured her stress on me,”What the hell is wrong with you! Always watching YouTube and never talking!” 
The worst time came when my parents tried to fix their relationship. Repeated date nights induced more arguments. Enduring the stress of her restaurant, my father, and her mistakes, my mom attempted to end her life. Fortunately, I found her just in time.  
Over the next two years, things were at times still hard, but gradually improved. My parents decided to start anew, took some time apart, then got back together. My mom started to pick me up from activities on time and my dad and I bonded more, watching Warriors and 49ers games. 
But at times I still had to emotionally support my mom to avoid sudden India trips, or put my siblings to bed if my parents weren’t home at night. Over time, I found it difficult being my family’s glue. I wanted back the family I had before the restaurant–the one that ate Luchi Mongsho together every Sunday night.
So I looked for comfort in creation. I began spending more time in our garage, carefully constructing planes from sheets of foam. I found purpose balancing the fuselage or leveling the ailerons to precisely 90 degrees. I loved cutting new parts and assembling them perfectly. Here, I could fix all the mistakes. 
In high school, I slowly began to forge a community of creators with my peers. Sophomore year, I started an engineering club and found that I had a talent for  managing people and encouraging them to create an idea even if it failed. I also learned how to take feedback and become more resilient. Here, I could nerd-out about warp drives and the possibility of anti-matter without being ignored. I would give a weekly report on new technology and we would have hour-long conversations about the various uses a blacker material could have. 
While building a community at school rebuilt my confidence, I still found I enjoyed being alone at times. While driving in my car, I’d let my mind wander to movies like Big Hero Six and contemplate if a zero-friction bike really was possible. I’d create ideas like an AI highway system that tells drivers exactly when to switch lanes based on timing and calculus to prevent braking from nearby cars. Or I’d blueprint a new classroom with interactive desks, allowing students to dive deep into historical events like a VR game. I found outlining complex ideas like these sometimes provide insights into something I’m researching or could one day materialize into future projects. 
Looking back (and perhaps inadvertently), the conflicts from the restaurant days have taught me valuable lessons. Helping my mom through her relationship taught me to watch out for those in emotional distress. Spending nights alone made me more independent–after all, it was then that I signed up for advanced math and programming courses and decided to apply for software internships. Most of all, seeing my mom start her restaurant from no food-industry experience inspired me to found two clubs and a Hydrogen Car Team. 
Even though we eat Luchi Monsho on a monthly basis now, I know my family will never be the way it was. My mom and I won’t become a Food Network mother-son duo. I can’t fix all the mistakes. But I can use them to improve the present.




Tab 21


Tab 22
THE “Flight” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Humans can fly. All they have to do is ask a question. Let me show you.
The question in your mind right now-Who is this guy, uhh, *squints eyes* Thomas Paige?-flies you as far back as the big bang. From there, it zips you to the formation of the earth, to cells, to that set of DNA mutations in those apes, to neolithic caves and hand paintings. To the fertile crescent between the Tigris and Eurphrates, to the marble Acropolis, to the domed temples of Jerusalem. To a New World and its bold declaration all men are created equal, to sugar cane plantations, to the smoggy cities of industry, to a man who had a dream, to the iPhone…as these were the happenings that set the foundation of my world. 
It flies you to my birth in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, as my mother, laying on a pull-out couch, held my body of pale-glow close to her chest, her light in the storm. To the mounds of books that sat fixed at the edge of my twin bed growing up, the stories of wonderful fairy dust and hard truths that raised me. To the white spring rivers of Appalachia, and the notorious rapid Bayless’ Boof that instilled within me courage and strength. To the greasy dishes and unflushed toilets of Kosher Cajun Deli, where I learned to work with my hands for others. To Mardi Gras and Jazz Fest, where I danced in a culture that bubbles up from the streets. To the school on the Mesa that allowed me to cultivate my light. To dark nights in my brother’s dorm room, when I learned brother was an honor and vital responsibility, not a mere label. To countless Friday nights at the Company Burger and its round table of banter, where I learned family extended past blood. To the snowy peaks and the blue valleys of Yosemite, where on trembling legs, I was absorbed into a wild vastness…as these were the things that have happened to me in my world. 
And, perhaps the most insightful piece, it books you a seat next to me, on my flights-to see the questions I am pursuing and where they’ve taken me. It explores my holy trinity-Who am I? Where am I? What should I do?-and its infinite splintering-Why do I get out of bed every morning? What does it mean to be human? What are the systems I exist within? Who do they benefit? What needs to change? How can I better serve others?  Hey, what is your story? What is a good question? … And their expeditions to Plato and his Republic, to Machiavelli and his Prince, to Portolá and his Alta California trek, to Willie Stark’s politics, to Aldous Huxley’s Door of Perceptions, but also to the WRITE Program, to Saint Joseph’s Spanish mass, to Pink Floyd, to Andy Warhol’s pop art, to South Park, to the Impractical Jokers…as this is my unwavering pursuit. 
It shows you how questions have taken me to the four corners of the globe, to imaginary realms of awe and fantasy, to epiphany and enlightenment, to devastation, to laughter, singing,  shrieking, and jumping. How they pique my creativity. How they expand my palate of human experience. How they further my understanding of my past and my place. How they test and revise my ideals. How they poke and prod at the black holes of my reality. How I incessantly ask them, because I learn. 
*Bee buum* Welcome back to ground, or I guess, your office. The question-Who is Thomas Paige?-flies through all of this and leaves you with no answer. Only the tower of history on which I stand. A candid, of another human. So I look you in the eye, and say, here I am. 
I live to question. And by questioning, I live.


Tab 23
THE “Game Show” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
I live on a small island nestled within the coast of Georgia. St. Simons is only 17 square miles, and the tranquil beaches and marsh line remind me of Van Gogh’s Wheat Fields with Cypresses. When my father grew up here, the island was only connected to the mainland by a drawbridge. During that time, he’d resist the isolation by watching Jeopardy every night. To give my brothers and me that same window of what lies beyond the golden marsh, at 7:30 PM, we all sit together as Johnny Gilbert says, “From the Alex Trebek Stage at Sony Picture Studios, this is Jeopardy!”
“Who is Emily Bronte”
Reading was my favorite pastime as a child. When I was thirteen, a Jeopardy question about an 1800s author grabbed my attention. I immediately checked out Wuthering Heights from the library. The gears in my brain flipped as I yearned for more symbolism to dissect and characters to psychoanalyze. My interests branched out like a fig tree, growing into books like Betty Frieden’s The Feminine Mystique and Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar. As I got older, books pulled me from the sometimes suffocating seclusion of the island and introduced me to new perspectives. I realized how critical it was to provide the same outlet for other students, so I founded a mentorship program where high schoolers read to local elementary students. Every time a kid asks if I can stay to read another book, I’m reminded of the importance of my community and how reading is a way to see beyond St. Simons.
“Who is Billie Holiday”
I grew up within the confines of the music room at church, which stifled my creativity. However, the melodic home of my grandmother became my safe haven. Every time my parents sent me to Elba, Alabama, I was greeted by Elvis Presley and Johnny Cash records ringing throughout her home. At night, her voice dripped with honey-sweet songs like “God Bless the Child,” the lullaby reminding me to be hopeful and stand on my own two feet. As I got older, visits became less frequent. Yet, years later, a Jeopardy clue pulled me back into the world of jazz and the freedom to express myself. I soon taught myself the electric and acoustic guitar, and dedicated my time to weekly piano lessons. I haven’t yet found others on my island interested in forming a band, though I still work to expand my creativity into new genres like rock and classical music-but my heart will always be intertwined with the smooth voice of my grandmother in the humid, summer breeze. 
“What is the UNESCO”
As a kid, I spent most holiday weekends with my paternal grandfather in southern Florida. His home is where I learned to fish, play chicken foot, bake, and where I watched Jeopardy. I would often beg to visit the nearby Everglades. The lush wetlands reminded me of my own island, and the chorus of creatures evoked a unique tranquility-all of which is protected as a UNESCO site. Environmentalism has been one of my key interests since starting high school, as the coastline and biological community of my home is directly impacted by climate change. I became an eager advocate of environmental policy while representing UNESCO for Model UN. I’m now club president, and this position allows me to cultivate an intellectual community striving for diplomacy, while still connecting to the environment and branching beyond the limits of my island.
“Who is Mary Long”
Throughout my life, Jeopardy’s grid of clues has remained an invitation for curiosity, shaping me into someone who is never afraid to ask deeper questions. More than anything, it’s created a connection between my family that has stayed constant. Jeopardy has become the bridge off of my island, just like one my father and brothers traveled over-and now I will-on a path to pursue a future education. 


Tab 24
THE “Where’s Parker” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
“Where’s Parker?” As a child, I’d wander off and let my imagination take the best of me. I’d see something, it would remind me of something else, then I would look up and my family would be gone. Crossing the streets of NYC, at school pick ups, at airports. I’ve been lost in many places. My endless imagination made me lose track of people and time, and so, as the youngest sibling in my family, I had to find my own way of entertaining myself. At my older brother’s baseball games, I resorted to making mud pies in bottle caps I found in the grass and melting crayons in the sun to create paint. I used my resources and created a world of my own imagination. This is my superpower: hyperfixation. 
Although as a child I could easily entertain myself within the walls of my own mind, as I got older this proved to also be a challenge. Initially, school was overwhelming. I would fixate on the wrong things, even in conversations. By the time middle school was over, I needed to make a change. I needed to be resourceful and find something to help me. However this time it couldn’t be bottle caps or crayons. 
In my search for a change, I turned to art. When I am in the art studio and begin to create, whether I am sketching or sculpting, everything around me turns black. Once the bristles coat themselves generously in thick acrylic paint, levitate from the palette leaving a Crest-toothpaste-commercial dollop of paint and touch the canvas ever so delicately, I begin. I become obsessed with what I am creating and lose all sense of time. Almost every free period I return here, to the art studio and to this world. I cut up long, overstimulating, overwhelming school days, using my love for art and the mental reset it provides me. Time stands still and when I wake up from this trance, everything else starts swelling back into cognitive realization. Art is my safe haven. 
I gained confidence as an artist when I was accepted into a selective, 2-year art program called Art Scholars, where I composed my favorite piece titled Fixations. This is a triptych piece about body image representing the state of the body versus the mind, composed of three plaster faces, with my own hands covering different parts of each face. I had never used plaster before, and despite my self doubt, it is my favorite piece to this day.
I wanted to form a creative, safe community for students to discover themselves outside of academics. As founder of the Creative Arts Club, I teach different techniques using mediums such as plaster, printing, or charcoal and generate prompts for more insightful work. Art has given me the confidence to step outside of my comfort zone and express my authentic voice.
Though art provides me with a mental reset, my experience of hyperfixation in sports is different. As soon as the whistle is blown, I am committed to one thing: the game. As Captain of basketball and track, it is my job to unite and lead by example. In basketball, I draw up formations on the white board before games and work with coaches to make plays. Even if I am subbed out, sitting on the bench, I am still devoted to the game. My body language shifts, connecting my eyes to the ball, staying with the rhythm of the game. I follow each play, and once I am subbed back in, I can come back as though I never left. Hyperfixation is my superpower. 
Now when people ask, “Where’s Parker?” I have an answer. I’m in the art studio, teaching students how to paper mache. I’m on the basketball court, making plays with my team. I’m still caught in my imagination at times, but I’ve learned to love that about myself.


Tab 25
THE “Walking the Dog” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Each night after sunset, my dog Finn, a rescue Plott Hound, pokes his head in my room every five minutes. “Finn, I haven’t forgotten about you buddy.” He sprints downstairs, grabs the leash, and waits by the door. I look forward to our walks each night. Stepping out into the cool night air brings me a sense of calm.
Walking through the stillness of the sleeping town is meditative for me. It allows me to find balance amid the mental and physical toll of my other endeavors: school, filmmaking, and ice hockey. Whether I’m studying for Econ, need a break from a video editing deadline, or just back from a grueling practice, taking Finn on a walk serves as a much-needed mental reset. The contrast between suicide sprints on the ice and the tranquility of the walk helps me find balance midst life’s hectic pace.
During our walk, I periodically stop to let him sniff his surroundings. Being a hound, Finn is constantly looking for a new scent or sometimes an old favorite. While Finn processes the world through his nose, I find things visually that I haven’t noticed before: the long line of ants marching in unison or the flash of a skunk’s black and white tail. I find myself telling backstories about the creatures and what led to the crossing of our paths. In the same way that Finn searches for new smells, I search for new perspectives.
Over the summer, I worked alongside members of the Mira Costa Cinema Club to create a narrative short film “12:48,” a movie about grief, misunderstanding, and the main character’s perceived role in his friend’s death due to a car accident. As lead writer for the film, I held story meetings to discuss dialogue flow, scene transitions, and script continuity. When I thought my writing was near completion, the members of our club would reveal to me their perception of the story, often being different than how I envisioned it. A member of our group had recently lost their grandmother; based on her comments I realized the denial aspect of grief was missing from the dialogue. In response to her feedback, I added a scene of the main character, Mac, attempting to continue his daily life, before ultimately breaking down from the guilt he’s feeling. My best work comes from collaborating with people who bring varied perspectives to a screenplay, creating a sharper, more multidimensional story.
If Finn has his way, we’d be out all night, sniffing every single blade of grass. I can’t fault him for wanting to discover new things. I often feel the same way. Like Finn, I’m always sniffing out my next business idea. Much like following a scent, good ideas require me to keep my nose to the ground. On one of our walks, after a day at Disneyland, I thought about the massive lines I stood in, for an authentic, screen accurate lightsaber, an item only available inside Disney property. People were dropping pretty pennies for these things, myself included. There’s no denying its wow factor. I discovered a niche market and began selling them globally. While this business was profitable, it had a moment in time. I constantly remind myself to treat these opportunities like a surfer. A surfer works to catch a wave, and enjoys the ride, knowing that the wave will inevitably come to an end. However, after every wave, the opportunity to catch another one arises. I’ve had a few successes and countless failed startups, but I’m motivated to keep searching for the next wave.
As Finn’s curiosity guides our walks each night, I hope to let my own curiosity guide myself forward in my future aspirations. Finn won’t always be by my side, but I hope to continue his spirit of discovery and allow myself time to ponder new ideas and self-reflect on my own choices.


Tab 26


Tab 27
THE “Horror Stories” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
“His head seems to bulge with the story; it is a little scary, the way it needs to get out. He feels that if it cannot escape by way of his racing hand that it will pop his eyes out in its urgency to escape and be concrete.” 
Bill Denbrough’s words pressed into my mind like a branding iron. Stephen King has a habit of inserting a writer character into his stories, his ‘self-insert’. But in my mind, Bill was me- just as much as Bill was Stephen. Bill had a completely different personality and distinct motivations, but we shared the same passion: storytelling. 
In 6th grade, I consumed Stephen King’s It in the span of three months. I carried that fake blood-stained brick of a novel with me everywhere. In the car, in math class (sorry, Mrs. Bailey), and even on the toilet. There was something magical about the story I’d never experienced. My previous idea of horror was derived from movies. It was cheap, flashy, and unnecessarily salacious. But horror in writing, especially King’s, maintained an impressive semblance of emotional realism. 
After deeply connecting with the Loser’s Club, Bill Denbrough’s friend group, I set out to create my own. I found it beautiful how the group’s love for one another grew in the face of hardship. To fully achieve this, I tried to persuade my friends to read the book with my own personalized narration. At lunch, I’d rant to them about the segments I’d just read. After school, I’d text spiels in group chats and rave to others on calls. On the weekends, I’d reenact my favorite scenes for friends, explaining the significance of each action. 
It turns out I was a pretty riveting storyteller. My passionate ramblings inspired a few friends to purchase the book and two to actually read it. Others, after hearing my renditions, read summaries and watched YouTube analyses (never reading the book out of fear). I felt proud. Witnessing my “It” fervor spread helped me realize I had a desire to tell stories.  
While middle school is long behind me, horror isn’t. Writing in this genre has become one of my favorite hobbies. One of my short stories, Goodbye Horses, tells of a schizophrenic, body-dysmorphic girl who skins the face off of her neighbor and wears it like a mask in an attempt to feel beautiful. Another story describes the murderous tendencies of a young Victorian boy’s best friend’s mother, told from his perspective. One of my favorites is about a lonely, unsatisfied college student who buys a garment from a mysterious, old Russian woman, and then drives herself mad abusing its powers. 
I write with the intention of sending a message. Goodbye Horses, addresses the damaging effects of the unachievable beauty standard women are held to. My Victorian murder story explores the consequences of early childhood trauma and neglect. Horror can be especially eye-opening when executed correctly. The genre achieves a kind of shocked empathy that I believe best convinces an individual to see the gravity of an issue. 
But another aspect of writing horror that I especially love is the humor of it. The goriest of details can sometimes be the funniest. The first time my friend Jason read my short story Goodbye Horses, he laughed in awe at the quote, “Her body was spewing blood like a popped water balloon.” Seeing Jason’s stupefied laughter wrought a feeling of joy in me, knowing how easy it is to relish in the comedy of horror. And while it’s fun to gross people out, these kinds of facetious details also ironically help solidify the seriousness of a horror story’s message. When people read the works I’ve written, I hope they discover a new perspective on some of the issues most important to me.
After all, stories have the potential to change lives. It certainly altered mine.




Tab 28
The “Rock, Paper, Scissors” UChicago Supplemental Essay Example
Essay written for the University of Chicago prompt, which gives you the option to create your own prompt..
Prompt: Dear Christian, the admissions staff at the University of Chicago would like to inform you that your application has been “put on the line.” We have one spot left and can’t decide if we should admit you or another equally qualified applicant. To resolve the matter, please choose one of the following:
Rock, paper, or scissors.
You will be notified of our decision shortly.
Response:
Rock beats scissors, scissors beats paper, and paper beats rock.  Wait… paper beats rock? Since when has a sheet of loose leaf paper ever defeated a solid block of granite? Do we assume that the paper wraps around the rock, smothering the rock into submission? When exposed to paper, is rock somehow immobilized, unable to fulfill its primary function of smashing scissors?  What constitutes defeat between two inanimate objects?
Maybe it’s all a metaphor for larger ideals. Perhaps paper is rooted in the symbolism of diplomacy while rock suggests coercion. But does compromise necessarily trump brute force? And where do scissors lie in this chain of symbolism?
I guess the reasoning behind this game has a lot to do with context. If we are to rationalize the logic behind this game, we have to assume some kind of narrative, an instance in which paper might beat rock. Unfortunately, I can’t argue for a convincing one.
As with rock-paper-scissors, we often cut our narratives short to make the games we play easier, ignoring the intricate assumptions that keep the game running smoothly. Like rock-paper-scissors, we tend to accept something not because it’s true, but because it’s the convenient route to getting things accomplished. We accept incomplete narratives when they serve us well, overlooking their logical gaps. Other times, we exaggerate even the smallest defects and uncertainties in narratives we don’t want to deal with. In a world where we know very little about the nature of “Truth,” it’s very easy-and tempting-to construct stories around truth claims that unfairly legitimize or delegitimize the games we play.
Or maybe I’m just making a big deal out of nothing…
Fine. I’ll stop with the semantics and play your game.
But who actually wants to play a game of rock-paper-scissors?  After all, isn’t it just a game of random luck, requiring zero skill and talent? That’s no way to admit someone!
Wrong.
Studies have shown that there are winning strategies to rock-paper-scissors by making critical assumptions about those we play against before the round has even started. Douglas Walker, host of the Rock-Paper-Scissors World Championships (didn’t know that existed either), conducted research indicating that males will use rock as their opening move 50% of the time, a gesture Walker believes is due to rock’s symbolic association with strength and force. In this sense, the seemingly innocuous game of rock-paper-scissors has revealed something quite discomforting about gender-related dispositions in our society. Why did so many males think that brute strength was the best option? If social standards have subliminally influenced the way males and females play rock-paper-scissors, than what is to prevent such biases from skewing more important decisions? Should your decision to go to war or to feed the hungry depend on your gender, race, creed, etc?
Perhaps the narratives I spoke of earlier, the stories I mistakenly labeled as “semantics,” carry real weight in our everyday decisions. In the case of Walker’s study, men unconsciously created an irrational narrative around an abstract rock. We all tell slightly different narratives when we independently consider notions ranging from rocks to war to existence. It is ultimately the unconscious gaps in these narratives that are responsible for many of the man-made problems this world faces. In order for the “life of the mind” to be a worthwhile endeavor, we must challenge the unconscious narratives we attach to the larger games we play-the truths we tell (or don’t tell), the lessons we learn (or haven’t really learned), the people we meet (or haven’t truly met).
But even after all of this, we still don’t completely understand the narrative behind rock-paper-scissors.  
I guess it all comes down to who actually made this silly game in the first place… I’d like to think it was some snotty 3rd grader, but then again, that’s just another incomplete narrative.