Tab 23
THE “Game Show” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
I live on a small island nestled within the coast of Georgia. St. Simons is only 17 square miles, and the tranquil beaches and marsh line remind me of Van Gogh’s Wheat Fields with Cypresses. When my father grew up here, the island was only connected to the mainland by a drawbridge. During that time, he’d resist the isolation by watching Jeopardy every night. To give my brothers and me that same window of what lies beyond the golden marsh, at 7:30 PM, we all sit together as Johnny Gilbert says, “From the Alex Trebek Stage at Sony Picture Studios, this is Jeopardy!”
“Who is Emily Bronte”
Reading was my favorite pastime as a child. When I was thirteen, a Jeopardy question about an 1800s author grabbed my attention. I immediately checked out Wuthering Heights from the library. The gears in my brain flipped as I yearned for more symbolism to dissect and characters to psychoanalyze. My interests branched out like a fig tree, growing into books like Betty Frieden’s The Feminine Mystique and Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar. As I got older, books pulled me from the sometimes suffocating seclusion of the island and introduced me to new perspectives. I realized how critical it was to provide the same outlet for other students, so I founded a mentorship program where high schoolers read to local elementary students. Every time a kid asks if I can stay to read another book, I’m reminded of the importance of my community and how reading is a way to see beyond St. Simons.
“Who is Billie Holiday”
I grew up within the confines of the music room at church, which stifled my creativity. However, the melodic home of my grandmother became my safe haven. Every time my parents sent me to Elba, Alabama, I was greeted by Elvis Presley and Johnny Cash records ringing throughout her home. At night, her voice dripped with honey-sweet songs like “God Bless the Child,” the lullaby reminding me to be hopeful and stand on my own two feet. As I got older, visits became less frequent. Yet, years later, a Jeopardy clue pulled me back into the world of jazz and the freedom to express myself. I soon taught myself the electric and acoustic guitar, and dedicated my time to weekly piano lessons. I haven’t yet found others on my island interested in forming a band, though I still work to expand my creativity into new genres like rock and classical music-but my heart will always be intertwined with the smooth voice of my grandmother in the humid, summer breeze. 
“What is the UNESCO”
As a kid, I spent most holiday weekends with my paternal grandfather in southern Florida. His home is where I learned to fish, play chicken foot, bake, and where I watched Jeopardy. I would often beg to visit the nearby Everglades. The lush wetlands reminded me of my own island, and the chorus of creatures evoked a unique tranquility-all of which is protected as a UNESCO site. Environmentalism has been one of my key interests since starting high school, as the coastline and biological community of my home is directly impacted by climate change. I became an eager advocate of environmental policy while representing UNESCO for Model UN. I’m now club president, and this position allows me to cultivate an intellectual community striving for diplomacy, while still connecting to the environment and branching beyond the limits of my island.
“Who is Mary Long”
Throughout my life, Jeopardy’s grid of clues has remained an invitation for curiosity, shaping me into someone who is never afraid to ask deeper questions. More than anything, it’s created a connection between my family that has stayed constant. Jeopardy has become the bridge off of my island, just like one my father and brothers traveled over-and now I will-on a path to pursue a future education.