Tab 25
THE “Walking the Dog” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Each night after sunset, my dog Finn, a rescue Plott Hound, pokes his head in my room every five minutes. “Finn, I haven’t forgotten about you buddy.” He sprints downstairs, grabs the leash, and waits by the door. I look forward to our walks each night. Stepping out into the cool night air brings me a sense of calm.
Walking through the stillness of the sleeping town is meditative for me. It allows me to find balance amid the mental and physical toll of my other endeavors: school, filmmaking, and ice hockey. Whether I’m studying for Econ, need a break from a video editing deadline, or just back from a grueling practice, taking Finn on a walk serves as a much-needed mental reset. The contrast between suicide sprints on the ice and the tranquility of the walk helps me find balance midst life’s hectic pace.
During our walk, I periodically stop to let him sniff his surroundings. Being a hound, Finn is constantly looking for a new scent or sometimes an old favorite. While Finn processes the world through his nose, I find things visually that I haven’t noticed before: the long line of ants marching in unison or the flash of a skunk’s black and white tail. I find myself telling backstories about the creatures and what led to the crossing of our paths. In the same way that Finn searches for new smells, I search for new perspectives.
Over the summer, I worked alongside members of the Mira Costa Cinema Club to create a narrative short film “12:48,” a movie about grief, misunderstanding, and the main character’s perceived role in his friend’s death due to a car accident. As lead writer for the film, I held story meetings to discuss dialogue flow, scene transitions, and script continuity. When I thought my writing was near completion, the members of our club would reveal to me their perception of the story, often being different than how I envisioned it. A member of our group had recently lost their grandmother; based on her comments I realized the denial aspect of grief was missing from the dialogue. In response to her feedback, I added a scene of the main character, Mac, attempting to continue his daily life, before ultimately breaking down from the guilt he’s feeling. My best work comes from collaborating with people who bring varied perspectives to a screenplay, creating a sharper, more multidimensional story.
If Finn has his way, we’d be out all night, sniffing every single blade of grass. I can’t fault him for wanting to discover new things. I often feel the same way. Like Finn, I’m always sniffing out my next business idea. Much like following a scent, good ideas require me to keep my nose to the ground. On one of our walks, after a day at Disneyland, I thought about the massive lines I stood in, for an authentic, screen accurate lightsaber, an item only available inside Disney property. People were dropping pretty pennies for these things, myself included. There’s no denying its wow factor. I discovered a niche market and began selling them globally. While this business was profitable, it had a moment in time. I constantly remind myself to treat these opportunities like a surfer. A surfer works to catch a wave, and enjoys the ride, knowing that the wave will inevitably come to an end. However, after every wave, the opportunity to catch another one arises. I’ve had a few successes and countless failed startups, but I’m motivated to keep searching for the next wave.
As Finn’s curiosity guides our walks each night, I hope to let my own curiosity guide myself forward in my future aspirations. Finn won’t always be by my side, but I hope to continue his spirit of discovery and allow myself time to ponder new ideas and self-reflect on my own choices.