Tab 27
THE “Horror Stories” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
“His head seems to bulge with the story; it is a little scary, the way it needs to get out. He feels that if it cannot escape by way of his racing hand that it will pop his eyes out in its urgency to escape and be concrete.” 
Bill Denbrough’s words pressed into my mind like a branding iron. Stephen King has a habit of inserting a writer character into his stories, his ‘self-insert’. But in my mind, Bill was me- just as much as Bill was Stephen. Bill had a completely different personality and distinct motivations, but we shared the same passion: storytelling. 
In 6th grade, I consumed Stephen King’s It in the span of three months. I carried that fake blood-stained brick of a novel with me everywhere. In the car, in math class (sorry, Mrs. Bailey), and even on the toilet. There was something magical about the story I’d never experienced. My previous idea of horror was derived from movies. It was cheap, flashy, and unnecessarily salacious. But horror in writing, especially King’s, maintained an impressive semblance of emotional realism. 
After deeply connecting with the Loser’s Club, Bill Denbrough’s friend group, I set out to create my own. I found it beautiful how the group’s love for one another grew in the face of hardship. To fully achieve this, I tried to persuade my friends to read the book with my own personalized narration. At lunch, I’d rant to them about the segments I’d just read. After school, I’d text spiels in group chats and rave to others on calls. On the weekends, I’d reenact my favorite scenes for friends, explaining the significance of each action. 
It turns out I was a pretty riveting storyteller. My passionate ramblings inspired a few friends to purchase the book and two to actually read it. Others, after hearing my renditions, read summaries and watched YouTube analyses (never reading the book out of fear). I felt proud. Witnessing my “It” fervor spread helped me realize I had a desire to tell stories.  
While middle school is long behind me, horror isn’t. Writing in this genre has become one of my favorite hobbies. One of my short stories, Goodbye Horses, tells of a schizophrenic, body-dysmorphic girl who skins the face off of her neighbor and wears it like a mask in an attempt to feel beautiful. Another story describes the murderous tendencies of a young Victorian boy’s best friend’s mother, told from his perspective. One of my favorites is about a lonely, unsatisfied college student who buys a garment from a mysterious, old Russian woman, and then drives herself mad abusing its powers. 
I write with the intention of sending a message. Goodbye Horses, addresses the damaging effects of the unachievable beauty standard women are held to. My Victorian murder story explores the consequences of early childhood trauma and neglect. Horror can be especially eye-opening when executed correctly. The genre achieves a kind of shocked empathy that I believe best convinces an individual to see the gravity of an issue. 
But another aspect of writing horror that I especially love is the humor of it. The goriest of details can sometimes be the funniest. The first time my friend Jason read my short story Goodbye Horses, he laughed in awe at the quote, “Her body was spewing blood like a popped water balloon.” Seeing Jason’s stupefied laughter wrought a feeling of joy in me, knowing how easy it is to relish in the comedy of horror. And while it’s fun to gross people out, these kinds of facetious details also ironically help solidify the seriousness of a horror story’s message. When people read the works I’ve written, I hope they discover a new perspective on some of the issues most important to me.
After all, stories have the potential to change lives. It certainly altered mine.