Tab 24
THE “Where’s Parker” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
“Where’s Parker?” As a child, I’d wander off and let my imagination take the best of me. I’d see something, it would remind me of something else, then I would look up and my family would be gone. Crossing the streets of NYC, at school pick ups, at airports. I’ve been lost in many places. My endless imagination made me lose track of people and time, and so, as the youngest sibling in my family, I had to find my own way of entertaining myself. At my older brother’s baseball games, I resorted to making mud pies in bottle caps I found in the grass and melting crayons in the sun to create paint. I used my resources and created a world of my own imagination. This is my superpower: hyperfixation. 
Although as a child I could easily entertain myself within the walls of my own mind, as I got older this proved to also be a challenge. Initially, school was overwhelming. I would fixate on the wrong things, even in conversations. By the time middle school was over, I needed to make a change. I needed to be resourceful and find something to help me. However this time it couldn’t be bottle caps or crayons. 
In my search for a change, I turned to art. When I am in the art studio and begin to create, whether I am sketching or sculpting, everything around me turns black. Once the bristles coat themselves generously in thick acrylic paint, levitate from the palette leaving a Crest-toothpaste-commercial dollop of paint and touch the canvas ever so delicately, I begin. I become obsessed with what I am creating and lose all sense of time. Almost every free period I return here, to the art studio and to this world. I cut up long, overstimulating, overwhelming school days, using my love for art and the mental reset it provides me. Time stands still and when I wake up from this trance, everything else starts swelling back into cognitive realization. Art is my safe haven. 
I gained confidence as an artist when I was accepted into a selective, 2-year art program called Art Scholars, where I composed my favorite piece titled Fixations. This is a triptych piece about body image representing the state of the body versus the mind, composed of three plaster faces, with my own hands covering different parts of each face. I had never used plaster before, and despite my self doubt, it is my favorite piece to this day.
I wanted to form a creative, safe community for students to discover themselves outside of academics. As founder of the Creative Arts Club, I teach different techniques using mediums such as plaster, printing, or charcoal and generate prompts for more insightful work. Art has given me the confidence to step outside of my comfort zone and express my authentic voice.
Though art provides me with a mental reset, my experience of hyperfixation in sports is different. As soon as the whistle is blown, I am committed to one thing: the game. As Captain of basketball and track, it is my job to unite and lead by example. In basketball, I draw up formations on the white board before games and work with coaches to make plays. Even if I am subbed out, sitting on the bench, I am still devoted to the game. My body language shifts, connecting my eyes to the ball, staying with the rhythm of the game. I follow each play, and once I am subbed back in, I can come back as though I never left. Hyperfixation is my superpower. 
Now when people ask, “Where’s Parker?” I have an answer. I’m in the art studio, teaching students how to paper mache. I’m on the basketball court, making plays with my team. I’m still caught in my imagination at times, but I’ve learned to love that about myself.