Tab 7
The “Grocery List” College Essay Example
The grocery list grew moist and crinkly in my hand. Seasoned shoppers circled the produce section, shaking excess water off leafy greens and slapping watermelons to test their ripeness. Meanwhile, I stared blankly at the shelves, baffled by the seemingly identical cilantro and parsley. I felt berry out of place.
When COVID hit, my mom shielded herself from the public due to her asthma. With our family’s main grocery shopper sidelined, someone needed to step up. 
That person was not my dad. 
On one trip, he committed three atrocious crimes that locked him in “husband jail”: mistaking green onion for leek, adding two dozen eggs to the 30 already in the fridge, and buying soymilk that poured out chunky. 
Thus, I volunteered to rescue the situation. Despite equally catastrophic results, my mom appreciated my willingness to help, which encouraged me to continue. As I shopped more often, my knowledge of foods broadened, and I no longer needed my mom’s list. Without it, I began to explore previously hidden corners of the store.
As a child, I embodied the “chicken tenders and fries” spirit. Once, after I was forced to try Mom’s roasted eggplant, tears streamed down my face in defiance. Slowly, grocery shopping introduced me to shelves full of flavors. One by one, falafel, goat cheese, and even beef tongue appeared in my basket. While expanding my palate, I also grew curious about fellow shoppers’ tastes. 
Why did that man buy six cartons of cashew milk? Do more people buy organic lemonade despite it being loaded with sugar? These questions sparked my interest in consumer behaviors, leading me to the Freakonomics series, the work of behavioral economist Richard Thaler, and eventually my research on how economic factors influence youth voting behavior.
But it wasn’t just the food that nourished me. 
One day, I heard drums coming from a checkout line. There, I met Siaka, an African cashier playing the djembe. I didn’t expect him to want to talk to me, but he cheerfully described how drumming connected back to his childhood in Mali. Another time, Brian the butcher asked me to solve a culinary puzzle: why do Asian shoppers often ask for two vertical cuts in a rack of ribs? I eagerly explained why sweet and sour ribs required such unusual specifications, and we bonded over my culture.
Growing up in a “parents talk, you listen” household, I wasn’t used to initiating leisurely conversations with adults outside my home. By chatting with Siaka, Brian, and others, I realized that each stranger has a unique story waiting to be discovered. Last summer, I had the opportunity to uncover the experiences of the Children’s Museum educators over bowls of bibimbap and pasta. In just eight weeks, strangers became storytellers, and coworkers became friends.
My interactions with others transcended words, however.
At home, my parents didn’t expect me to help other than getting the mail and taking the trash out. In the grocery store, I found myself more useful. When a customer accidentally triggered a domino effect of apples, I chased them down. When a lady in a wheelchair reached for a salad, I grabbed it for her. These are small gestures but exemplify what positive change means to me: helping one person at a time. 
With this spirit, I enjoyed spending ten minutes explaining the Pennsylvania voting process to one student, patiently coaching a boy to hit a golf ball out of the sand, and teaching an Afghani refugee to solve an algebra problem. And, of course, shopping for my mom.  
Three years ago, grocery shopping started as a daunting task; never did I imagine it would become an experience of self-exploration and connecting with others. Looking ahead, life will certainly offer other intimidating responsibilities-paying taxes, fixing a leaky faucet, and cooking, to name a few. When I take these tasks on, what new horizons will I discover?
Only thyme will tell.