Tab 59
I am an MS student at Carnegie Mellon University working with Prof. Virginia Smith, Artur Dubrawski, and Steven Wu. My research focuses on privacy-preserving machine learning with an emphasis on federated learning (FL) and differential privacy (DP); more broadly, I’m interested in both developing and understanding ML methods and systems that can be easily and responsibly deployed in the real world. These interests have drawn me to two broad directions I’d like to explore at Berkeley:


1. Evolving notions of ML privacy: What notions of (differential) privacy are suitable for what scenarios, and when can they be relaxed? More generally, what do we mean for ML to be “private” when training examples do not align well with the sensitive information we want to protect?


2. Practical privacy: Can we build methods that drastically improve the privacy-utility tradeoff so as to afford privacy as a default for ML? How do these methods interact with other desirable properties of ML, such as efficiency and generalization?


My decision to pursue a PhD has been a natural outcome of my past exploration. I’ve had the opportunities to work on a spectrum of problems from the applied side [1, 2, 3] to those that involve careful analysis [4, 5, 6, 7] both in the industry and as a research student, and I’ve also engineered and deployed some of my published methods in practice [8, 9]. Through these experiences, I gained interest in ideas and methods from both theoretical and empirical research, and I believe ML privacy is one of the rare areas situated at this intersection where better privacy mechanisms often directly translate to tangible improvements in real-world applications. I believe a PhD is an exciting next step because making progress in open directions, such as the above, would require me to both deepen my understanding of this field and explore into related areas; a PhD is the unique opportunity that gives me the time, freedom, and curiosity to do both. In the following, I outline my initial work, learnings, and motivation in my intended directions as well as other interests that I hope to explore.


Evolving notions of ML privacy


As ML methods, systems, and problem settings evolve, so should how we define and implement privacy. My first exposure in this direction was through my work on distributed differential privacy at Google, published at ICML’21 [4] and NeurIPS’21 [5] and deployed at scale for applications like Gboard. Distributed DP asks the following: can we achieve central DP-like guarantees under a local DP setup, where n clients each noise their vector locally to minimize their trust in the central aggregator? Prior work bridges the O(√n) local/central utility gap assuming trusted shufflers or execution environments, but it remained open whether we could do so leveraging cryptography, specifically secure aggregation (SecAgg). With my collaborators, I put together the first working system for distributed DP with SecAgg using distributed discrete Gaussians (DDG)—client vectors are appropriately clipped, scaled, rotated/reflected, rounded, locally noised, and securely summed—and I showed that it matches the performance of the central, continuous Gaussian even under low bitwidths [4]. However, discrete Gaussian noise is tricky to sample and not closed under summation, and tuning the discretization factor γ that simultaneously touches on privacy, communication, and utility can be challenging. To address these issues, we also analyzed the Skellam noise as a practical alternative [5]: it is closed under summation, easy to sample, and has an RDP overhead over Gaussians shrinking quickly at 1/poly(variance)—a small compromise from DDG’s 1/exp(variance) in practice—and it thus has a matching performance in production. Moreover, I proposed a simple method leveraging private quantiles of client vector `2-norms to automatically tune γ, substantially simplifying the deployment of our distributed DP algorithms. These experiences meddling with cryptography, compression, empirical heuristics, and engineering issues showed me that there is meaningful headroom for better privacy tools if we see privacy as a multi-faceted problem rather than a standalone statistical discipline.


In another work along this direction at CMU, I studied the application of DP for cross-silo federated learning. Past work on differentially private FL, including my distributed DP efforts, has centered on client-level DP, but in cross-silo FL there are much fewer clients with large local datasets and varying privacy targets, and more importantly the entities that enjoy protection (e.g. institutions) may not align with those we want to protect (e.g. people). In my paper at NeurIPS’22 [6], I found that the need for granular protection and model personalization in cross-silo FL naturally points to a relaxation which we call silo-specific sample-level privacy, where each client caters to the privacy of its own samples as it participates in FL protocols. I thoroughly analyzed many of its interesting implications, such as the removal of trust on the server, the breakdown of local fine-tuning for (provably) effective personalization, and the emergence of a privacy-heterogeneity cost tradeoff and the role of personalization in navigating it. I showed that mean-regularized multi-task learning forms a simple but surprisingly strong baseline under these conditions, but also investigated its practical complications in terms of hyperparameter tuning. This project reinforced my understanding that privacy is interwoven with many aspects of learning and good privacy algorithms should not be developed in isolation.


Practical privacy


A major roadblock in the wide adoption of differential privacy in ML is its practicality, primarily in terms of the stark privacy-utility tradeoff. Currently, I’m leading a project at CMU exploring the mitigation of per-example clipping bias of DP training through various generalization methods. I noticed that the recent empirical success of [10] suggests an outsized role of data augmentation in boosting DP-SGD performance that correlates to smaller augmentation-averaged gradient norms. Drawing connections to the body of work on sharpness-aware optimization which (debatably) links generalization to flatter minina, I’m investigating whether various generalization methods would remain equally effective across private and non-private optimization; one curious observation is that while both augmentation and gradient norm penalty reduces the magnitude part of clipping bias, only the latter sees to reduce the direction part which manifests as smaller utility drop from clipping. Understanding and mitigating the clipping bias would be a key step towards making DP practical, and I hope to explore this further with both empirical and theoretical analysis.


I’m also interested in private adaptive optimization and am crucially involved in the development of DP2 [7], a family of adaptive optimizers leveraging delayed preconditioners to drastically improve privacy-utility tradeoffs. DP2 is based on the simple idea that in many tasks the underlying loss geometry doesn’t change much over training, and we can learn less noisy but stale preconditioners using averages of past private gradients. DP2 is very practical and efficient as it does not require public data or 2nd-order computation; I performed the empirical analyses in our ICLR’23 submission and OPT’22 talk [7] and it was motivating to see DP2 excelling on real-world tasks. Through this work, I also discovered a tangential interest in efficient private ML systems—I wrote our code from scratch with auto-vectorization and JIT compilation and massively accelerated our research with over 10× speedup over our initial prototype. I’m curious to explore other higher/lower-level efficiency methods too.


Working at Berkeley & Future Plans


At Berkeley, I’m excited to explore these directions and beyond in the broader area of trustworthy ML. For example, I’m interested in relaxations of (differential) privacy for ML and FL, such as fine-grained analyses and label-only protection. Moreover, what if a person’s data are distributed across multiple clients in FL? How do we protect privacy as well as intellectual property in the recent surge of foundation models? Catering to such intricate scenarios that necessitate tools beyond standard DP would be interesting. I’m also keen to take alternative perspectives on practical privacy; one example is to examine what ‘weak’ DP can offer in practice, as large ε’s may still be effective against membership and per-attribute inference, data reconstruction, and (to some extent) FL backdoors, owing to DP being a uniform and worst-case guarantee. With my experiences in ML deployment [8] and benchmarking [11], I’m also interested in collaborative and open-source efforts on private ML systems and benchmarking to facilitate future research in these areas.


Following my background and interests, particularly in the areas of federated learning and differential privacy, I would love to work with Professors Dawn Song, Michael Jordan, Jelani Nelson, and Nika Haghtalab. I’m also excited to explore how the above relates to cryptography and ML security with Prof. Raluca Ada Popa, as well as how it may intersect with adjacent fields such as economics and policy-making.


I believe Berkeley is a great place to pursue my PhD for its strong faculty, student body, and interdisciplinary culture, and while my past experiences inform my current interests, I’m open and eager to explore new directions too. Looking forward, I intend to become a professor after my PhD for the unique opportunities to make my impact through research and mentoring and to pass on the positive influence I’ve been fortunate to receive from my research advisors. I believe my skillsets and interests make me the ideal candidate and a valuable component to Berkeley’s diverse intellectual community as I continue to learn and contribute in the above areas.