Tab 22
THE “Flight” COLLEGE ESSAY EXAMPLE
Humans can fly. All they have to do is ask a question. Let me show you.
The question in your mind right now-Who is this guy, uhh, *squints eyes* Thomas Paige?-flies you as far back as the big bang. From there, it zips you to the formation of the earth, to cells, to that set of DNA mutations in those apes, to neolithic caves and hand paintings. To the fertile crescent between the Tigris and Eurphrates, to the marble Acropolis, to the domed temples of Jerusalem. To a New World and its bold declaration all men are created equal, to sugar cane plantations, to the smoggy cities of industry, to a man who had a dream, to the iPhone…as these were the happenings that set the foundation of my world. 
It flies you to my birth in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, as my mother, laying on a pull-out couch, held my body of pale-glow close to her chest, her light in the storm. To the mounds of books that sat fixed at the edge of my twin bed growing up, the stories of wonderful fairy dust and hard truths that raised me. To the white spring rivers of Appalachia, and the notorious rapid Bayless’ Boof that instilled within me courage and strength. To the greasy dishes and unflushed toilets of Kosher Cajun Deli, where I learned to work with my hands for others. To Mardi Gras and Jazz Fest, where I danced in a culture that bubbles up from the streets. To the school on the Mesa that allowed me to cultivate my light. To dark nights in my brother’s dorm room, when I learned brother was an honor and vital responsibility, not a mere label. To countless Friday nights at the Company Burger and its round table of banter, where I learned family extended past blood. To the snowy peaks and the blue valleys of Yosemite, where on trembling legs, I was absorbed into a wild vastness…as these were the things that have happened to me in my world. 
And, perhaps the most insightful piece, it books you a seat next to me, on my flights-to see the questions I am pursuing and where they’ve taken me. It explores my holy trinity-Who am I? Where am I? What should I do?-and its infinite splintering-Why do I get out of bed every morning? What does it mean to be human? What are the systems I exist within? Who do they benefit? What needs to change? How can I better serve others?  Hey, what is your story? What is a good question? … And their expeditions to Plato and his Republic, to Machiavelli and his Prince, to Portolá and his Alta California trek, to Willie Stark’s politics, to Aldous Huxley’s Door of Perceptions, but also to the WRITE Program, to Saint Joseph’s Spanish mass, to Pink Floyd, to Andy Warhol’s pop art, to South Park, to the Impractical Jokers…as this is my unwavering pursuit. 
It shows you how questions have taken me to the four corners of the globe, to imaginary realms of awe and fantasy, to epiphany and enlightenment, to devastation, to laughter, singing,  shrieking, and jumping. How they pique my creativity. How they expand my palate of human experience. How they further my understanding of my past and my place. How they test and revise my ideals. How they poke and prod at the black holes of my reality. How I incessantly ask them, because I learn. 
*Bee buum* Welcome back to ground, or I guess, your office. The question-Who is Thomas Paige?-flies through all of this and leaves you with no answer. Only the tower of history on which I stand. A candid, of another human. So I look you in the eye, and say, here I am. 
I live to question. And by questioning, I live.