Tab 4
The “Deli Connections” College Essay Example
Hey Mike, I need a Godfather Sub, no tomato, and a Foot Surfer without avocado! The biggest hit of the day approaches as the clock ticks down to 12:00 noon. I rush over the order tickets. The bell chimes, the door swings open, and the guys working construction on the Jupiter Medical Center flood the deli. Working at Rinaldi’s is more than just a source of income; it is a microcosm of who I have become: a multilingual student committed to understanding and engaging in global affairs; an independent learner able to balance my intellectual and artistic pursuits with the need to structure my time and refine my skills; someone who steps into the shoes of others, and considers issues from contrasting perspectives.
I grew up in Briarcliff Manor, a small homogeneous town in New York State. Since birth, I had known everybody, every street, and every waiter at Squire’s, where I got the crinkly fries and chicken tenders. I was perfectly happy in my hometown, neither traveling nor speaking other languages. In 8th grade, my family’s move to Jupiter, Florida, near Miami, was a shock that led to a massive cultural awakening. I dove into my new surroundings and began working at a popular local deli: Jupiter Rinaldi’s.
Qué le gustaría pedir, señor? Interacting with local deli customers, many of whom hail from Spanish-speaking countries, ignites my eagerness to learn their language and experience their cultures. I develop an empathy for these workmen who come in sweaty, tired, hungry, and pressed for time on their lunch break, yet hesitate to order in English. I love to see the joy on their faces and to hear them laugh when I speak their native language. The deli becomes my daily classroom: real interactions replace vocabulary lists. I realize that communicating across language barriers is a super power, opening infinite possibilities to connect with people.
Interacting with customers at the deli catalyzes my linguistic journey. One day, my Spanish teacher introduces himself in German, which sounds beautiful and rich. I immediately install Duolingo and practice. My enthusiasm for Spanish initially leads to studying German, then studying the cyrillic alphabet for Russian, then memorizing over 60 Hiragana and Katakana characters for Japanese. Now I am watching documentaries and Netflix series in other languages, reading books like “Western Philosophy in Simple Spanish” and “World War 1 in Simple German,” (by Olly Richards, leader of the YouTube language dorks). I even watch SpongeBob, my favorite childhood show, in German. I link my passion for languages to my love of history and am becoming a self-made historian. “Das Boot,” “Downfall,” and “Babylon Berlin,” subtitled in English, acquaint my ear with German, but also immerse me in the Weimar Republic and WWII. I examine major events of the 20th century, in Germany and the USSR, and develop an understanding of how propaganda campaigns weaponize entire generations for their own gain. I grow aware of the ever-present danger when history repeats itself.
Everything exact, all right? my boss Mike always exclaims. Integral to my deli job is running the meat slicer so that the slices come out right: not too thin, not too thick. I’ve learned to calibrate the thickness of the slice, place the correct amount of pressure on the adjustable plate, show up on time, shoulder responsibility, do what I’m told, respect hierarchy, and, as taught by my parents, always try my best. I use my time efficiently, develop a daily pattern, build my days around work, and exercise at Topper Fitness after my shift. 
Perfecting my slicing extends far beyond deli meats to include refining a Hendrix riff for days on my fittingly Irish-green stratocaster, or honing my collection of ridiculously obscure Major League Baseball statistics. Serving customers equips me to mediate arguments among friends, and forging a family at Rinaldi’s assures me that I can make any community my home.