In the annals of ordinary Tuesdays, January 9th, 2007, stood out like a radiant beacon. At precisely 11 a.m. Central Standard Time, the stage was set for Steve Jobs' eagerly awaited MacWorld keynote. Like countless other Apple devotees, I was gripped by an anticipation bordering on fervor, certain that this would be the moment when Jobs would unveil Apple's next groundbreaking innovation. As midnight struck on the eve of this historic day, a quiet triumph unfolded at my household: my mother, in acknowledging the indomitable spirit of Apple that has long been an integral part of my identity, granted me permission to skip school the following day. This decision served as a testament not only to my unwavering passion for all things technological but also to the self-image I've cultivated over time: that of an audacious innovator, an aspiring young entrepreneur, and a lifelong tech enthusiast who has been captivated by the digital realm since first learning to manipulate a mouse.

Cords, gadgets and screens have been my signature since infancy. According to my baby book, my first real word was “hose.” I thought those long green things in people’s yards were outdoor electrical cords. At age six I wanted only one thing from Santa: an overhead projector. “He” found one on eBay. At age eight I purchased (with my own savings) and installed (by myself) a dazzling holiday light display that not only lit up the entire neighborhood but our electrical bill as well. This same year I launched my first successful business: Tony’s Tech Help. Two years later and after saving many months’ earnings, I invested in my first laptop. I was unaware at the time how that purchase would significantly kindle my computer science curiosity.

My new best friend was that new MacBook Pro. I spent hours learning about it while my parents spent hours screaming: “Too much screen time!” At age 11, I was authoring hacky programs and writing bits of code. At age 12, I rented my first server and became fluent in multiple programming languages. In 8th grade, I didn’t just go to school; I spent time each day monitoring my servers and maintaining more than a dozen websites for local businesses and nonprofits. At age 15, I had the idea that would become my next business.

Enter Minecraft, the defining game of my generation. It was Fall 2012 and I started dabbling in coding Minecraft server “plug-ins.” It didn’t take long until buzz about my work grew and I became one of the recognized experts in the global server community. Then came an idea: develop team combat matches organized by server plug-ins on unique Minecraft maps, a concept no one else had yet brought to market. What came next was a prototype, and then growth: from a dozen players on my development server to more than a hundred players on my first 24/7 server. People loved what I had to offer! Just a few months later my infrastructure built on Java, Ruby, MongoDB, and Nginx was exploding with new subscribers and became “The Overcast Network.” By 2013 I was seeing nearly 100,000 unique users and more than 1,000,000 page views per week. I also saw competing servers popping up attempting to mimic my concept. Watching my idea become a wildly successful business was an incredible feeling. In the last 10 months, unique users and page views per week have doubled. I’m also about to present at the international Minecraft convention, Minecon, on the panel “Growing Server Communities.”

Crafting the gameplay, interface, and user experience for Overcast has been a continually inspiring journey, one that is buoyed by the enduring legacy of Apple and Steve Jobs. Their relentless pursuit of innovation through design and simplicity continues to serve as a beacon, instilling in me an unwavering appreciation for pushing boundaries and taking calculated risks.

As I navigate the labyrinthine path of my computer science education and chart my course as an entrepreneur, I am firmly resolved to embody Jobs' wise words from his 2005 Stanford University commencement address: "Stay hungry, stay foolish." This ethos, a call to maintain a relentless curiosity and resist complacency, will guide me in all that I do.